JAMES GRAHAM





Plays: 1




Tory Boyz

Sons of York

A History of Falling Things

The Whisky Taster

The Man



with an introduction by the author





Methuen Drama





Contents


Reviews

Introduction

Tory Boyz

Cast List

Characters

Sons of York

Cast List

Characters

Act One

Scene One

Scene Two

Scene Three

Scene Four

Act Two

Scene One

Scene Two

A History of Falling Things

Cast List

Characters

The Whisky Taster

Cast List

Characters

Act One

Scene One

Scene Two

Scene Three

Scene Four

Scene Five

Scene Six

Act Two

Scene One

Scene Two

Scene Three

Scene Four

The Man

Cast List

Characters

Chronology

By the Same Author





Reviews


Tory Boyz: ‘According to this intriguing, contentious new play by James Graham . . . [Edward] Heath suppressed his natural sexual instincts in order to ascend the Tory ladder. The tragedy, in Graham’s reading, is that any potential gay successor would have to do much the same fifty years on . . . The play . . . captures well the contradictions of the modern Tory party where careerist young toffs . . . co-exist with working-class idealists . . . The former even mocks the latter for being “one of them”, meaning people who want to make things better.’

Guardian

Sons of York: ‘Undoubtedly one of the best new plays of the year. Set in 1978, some five years before the prodigious young James Graham was born, it joins the growing series of fine plays set in Hull, following works from John Godber and Richard Bean . . . On the surface, this might seem like a gritty Northern family drama with comic touches. It is also an extended metaphor for its times, in a small way reminiscent of the rash of artistic offerings set in 1913 during an idyllic period before an even more deadly watershed than the arrival of the Iron Lady and her cohorts . . . Graham mixes the political and personal with rare skill.’

British Theatre Guide

A History of Falling Things: ‘James Graham’s . . . play is a sheer delight. As a romantic comedy it is touchingly romantic and very funny without ever allowing you to forget the debilitating effect of living with what to others seem absurd fears . . . An enormously entertaining, heart-warming and funny play.’

Stage

The Whisky Taster: ‘A brilliantly pacey and culturally penetrating . . . comedy by James Graham . . . It induces some of the exhilaration you get from the headlong knowingness of the best TV comedy, such as The Thick of It, while having the strong metaphoric framework of inspired theatre . . . Part of the great pleasure of the piece lies in the . . . dialogue that has its ear to the future. . . . The very talented author manages to pack in unpretentiously many of our current preoccupations.’

Independent

The Man: ‘What would a year’s worth of receipts, the kind of bundle you’d need to complete a self-employed tax-return, say about your life, if you were to pile them up and sift them all through? That’s the beautifully simple idea at the heart of James Graham’s ingenious, touching and wryly intelligent . . . play . . . Perhaps what’s most impressive, though, is the way that Graham takes an arid, theatrically unpromising activity and finds in it scope to unpack all kinds of youthful confusions, dashed hopes, shrewd insights and mixed feelings. What has he to declare? Talent – tons of it.’

Telegraph

James Graham won the Catherine Johnson Award for the Best Play 2007 for Eden’s Empire. His previous plays include Albert’s Boy (recipient of a Pearson Playwriting Bursary), Little Madam (Finborough), Tory Boyz (Soho Theatre), A History of Falling Things (Clwyd Theatr Cymru), The Man (Finborough), The Whisky Taster (Bush), and Sons of York (Finborough). This House was commissioned by the National Theatre and had its world premiere in 2012. James is writer-in-residence at the Finborough Theatre.





Introduction


The cliché that writers cling to when trying to describe the terror of creating something from nothing is that ‘fear of the blank page’. I suffer from the opposite. I love the blank page. It presents nothing but opportunities. I procrastinate the act of filling it for as long as possible, preserving the pureness of the idea in my head before I begin polluting and corrupting it, fumbling inadequately at it. As a playwright, before you begin writing, there’s a very real chance your play could be funny, moving, insightful, relatable, urgent, painful, beautiful. It’s an opportunity to explore preoccupations, translate anger, maybe share some hurt. And then the pen hits the page, the fingers strike the keys . . . and with every stroke your own limitations in craft, technique, means of expression, come to the fore; the destination you saw on the horizon ebbing further and further away. The amount of mental blood, sweat and tears it can take to reach it, or get close, never fails to surprise me. But on the blank page – or rather, within that empty space of the stage – anything is possible.

Collected here are the fruits of some of my first attempts to fill spaces with something. This anthology covers a period of playwriting that began with my first professional show at the Finborough Theatre, London, in the summer of 2005 – those unreal weeks of the bombings that directly followed the capital’s successful Olympic bid – to the summer of 2012, where I’m writing this now, about to go into rehearsals for my first National Theatre production as the London Olympics, now built and ready, open to the world.

I don’t mean to imply any undue significance in this time frame except to say that no doubt the state of the world during this period, and the city in which I live, has naturally infected the fabric of these plays, partly in ways that I’m probably not altogether fully conscious of. All the plays in this collection are inherently ‘political’, whatever that really means. They all feel restlessly bound up in the past, with a yearning to look to the future. There’s perhaps a touch of naivety in their outlook, or their hope, which I don’t much mind. I was young. Younger. What I notice in all of the plays is a niggling preoccupation with ‘Britain’ and a post-war British identity – politically, socially, culturally, emotionally . . .

Inherent in all this, even in this introduction, are the inescapable pangs of inadequacy and unworthiness which I’m sure afflict most other ‘new’/‘young’/ ‘up-and-coming’ playwrights (circle the phrase du jour). I’m not sure when you officially become an actual bona fide ‘writer’, but I still often lack the confidence to say I am one, outright, to someone I don’t know. A typical conversation might be:

THEM: So, what do you do?

ME: Er, I like . . . work in theatre and TV and stuff. A bit.

THEM: Oh, really? Cool. Like, doing what?

ME: Like drama and . . . and, yeah. That kind of thing.

THEM: Right. (Beat.) Like directing or . . . ?

ME: Uh, no, like . . . scripts, doing the scripts and creating the . . . you know like, characters and dialogue and stuff. Story.

THEM: Oh, OK. (Beat). So you’re a writer?

ME: . . . Uh, yeah.

Theatre isn’t in my blood. The ‘arts’ don’t run in my family. Though that’s not to say I wasn’t encouraged to be creative from an early age. I grew up in a mining town in Nottinghamshire. My hard-working mum was a lot of things as I grew up – from a barmaid in the local pub (which in my eyes made her a celebrity) to a primary school administrator. My dad spent his entire working life at Nottingham City Council, having gone in at ground level and then working his way up to the legal services department, where he stayed until his retirement.

For whatever reason, I spent a lot of my childhood inside my own head, where I felt safe and had fun. My mum would fold sheets of A4 paper and staple them together like a proper book, and I would fill them with stories. Too many. I must have pissed her off with the relentlessness of my output (though she never showed it), watching her as she read them (then, as now, the point was not in the act of creating it, but in the joy of sharing). As a toddler, I graduated to a typewriter, and, when this later evolved into a brand new electric typewriter, my excitement went off the chart (totally beating the thrill of seeing an iPad or a MacBook years later). I barely left it: it was brilliant. It could delete and everything (sort of). And a sentiment that I share with the character of Ben in my play The Man is that I feel in constant need of a delete button. In writing and in real life.

Having not seen ‘a proper play’ until I was in my mid-teens (Shakespeare, inevitably – and more on that later), my first real theatrical epiphany came when I was ten years old, cast as the title role of Oliver at Kirkby Woodhouse primary school. The only slight problem was that I couldn’t sing. Not a note. But I was cute and skinny, so our (wonderful) headmaster Mr Kilburn negotiated around this by getting a boy who could sing to come on stage and do it for me every time a song came up, while I sat at the side and emoted. I’m not sure what my singing double must have thought of me, taking the role that should have been his, but I didn’t care. I’d hit the big time . . .

It was in the classroom rather than an actual theatre that I fell in love with plays. Ashfield Comprehensive School was, and still is, one of the largest secondary schools in the country, sucking in pupils from the surrounding areas of Kirkby, Sutton, Mansfield – at the time, and at various points since, in the economic doldrums as the mines began to close and industry dried up. I was invariably shy and lacking in confidence as I grew up (not growing quickly enough – small and skinny and awkward being my thing way before ‘geek chic’ became fashionable), but, as is often the case, what drew me out of myself was the ability to perform. In drama classes or in school plays I was, for whatever reason, able to make people laugh. The hard kids, popular kids, the teachers. In many ways, it saved me; I was cast in the extrovert roles – Sideways in Our Country’s Good, Prospero in Return to the Forbidden Planet, Mercutio, and more. In fact, thanks to our inspiring and redoubtable head of drama, Martin Humphrey – without whom I doubt I’d be writing this, now – the Ashfield School plays became something ‘cool’, to be seen in and, as such, there were enough of us interested for the first A Level Drama course to be done there: previously an oddity in a tough northern comp.

Opting for English Literature, Drama and, just as importantly, History in the sixth form sealed the deal for me. All three are about storytelling – how you set stories down, how you bring them to life and, perhaps, where they might come from). Coming into contact with the works of Dario Fo, Samuel Beckett, Harold Pinter and Alan Bennett was a revelation. I recall the first time I read The Caretaker – at the time, probably the newest piece of ‘new writing’ I’d come into contact with, having thought all plays were old – and being knocked back by its ability to replicate the natural rhythms, nuances and idiosyncrasies of everyday speech while still being heightened and theatrical. I recall watching a video of Talking Heads while following the text with my finger, seeing for the first time the process of how a blueprint might be interpreted and then built. And then, not to ignore the big man, I recall the school trip to watch Othello at the RSC (directed, I find out years later, by Michael Attenborough). It gripped me beyond words: the excitement after Othello and Iago made their plan to kill and take revenge before the interval, and the curtain came down and I smashed my hands together as hard as I could, whether or not it was cool to do so, surrounded by my peers. It was a transformative experience.

A cabal of us, formed in our sixth-form group, took a play to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe – something I’d barely heard of. But with the experience of another teacher, Angela Martin, we trouped up there with Dario Fo’s Accidental Death of an Anarchist (probably embedding in me the notion that a play, particularly a funny play, can be used as a political weapon). Kipping on the floor of a church and performing to an appreciative audience hundreds of miles from home all felt very cool. I realised this is what I wanted to do – in some form, any form – though being at the festival and seeing the sheer amount of budding performers and practitioners was a little daunting. I felt like I’d perhaps got into this all a little late . . .

Although my parents hadn’t done so, like so many of my generation, I decided I wanted to go to university. My other motivating drama teacher, Karen Promosso – who had infused in me her passion for commedia dell’arte – had studied at the University of Hull. Despite the allure of perhaps sexier cities like Manchester, I opted for this, attracted by its emphasis on theatre-making in a city, courtesy of Hull Truck, with a long history of popular, working-class theatre.

This was the time of my life. My intake in the year 2000 doubled, or perhaps even tripled, what had been a relatively intimate department during the age when Anthony Minghella had studied there a decade earlier. But, for me, this just added to its vibrancy and life. Using the department’s incredible Donald Roy Theatre (its facilities, from fly galleries above, a pit below, and flexible seating all around would be the envy of many professional spaces), we were encouraged to quite simply mount shows. Spending far fewer hours in the library than I maybe should have, morning, evenings and weekends were spent hammering and drilling pieces of set together, stitching costumes, painting floors. The department had some inspiring people teaching there. To Sarah Jane Dickenson and J. Michael Walton in particular I owe a debt of gratitude.

I acted, which I always enjoyed (too much – corpsing being my chief weakness). I also tried directing. Six undergrads were chosen every year to direct a ‘main house’ show, which received large budgets and facilities, and was open to the public. I chose to do The Madness of George III by Alan Bennett. Though it was originally a National Theatre show, I had come to it first through the feature film, having watched it in History class. I loved it for its humour, its heart and its scale. Having said that, I directed it pretty badly. I had a writer’s hat on throughout without realising – since the text was clear to me, I assumed it must be clear to the actors as well, without the need to interrogate it. So in my mind, my job was to tell people where to stand and make sure they were lit.

Most importantly though, I’d begun writing. Quite privately (when is it a good time to tell your friends you’re not coming out drinking because you’re ‘making things up’ in your room?). But I’d seen others do it – pop something down on paper, get some actors together, throw it on to the stage. My first ever stab at it was ‘a narrative poem’ kind of thing, sort of a comical homage to Under Milk Wood. It was called A Pleasant Rhyme and featured a cast of villagers who spoke in verse while wearing rictus grins to hide the dark undertones of their community. It went down well. People laughed and that was all that mattered to me then. Having done that, I had the confidence to write my first full-length play. In the summer of 2001, while working in various warehouses and factories (night shifts at a plastic factory being the one that stays with me now), I wrote Coal Not Dole!, a sort of social realist, history play based on the Miners’ Strike of 1984, which had a permeating effect on my community. Featuring five male miners and five female factory workers, it was perhaps not accidentally influenced by that Hull titan John Godber in its style and tone, but I relished for the first time trying to capture the voices of the people around me, trying to portray them realistically, honestly. I directed it myself, and Z Theatre Company (Hull University’s fringe festival outfit) took it to the festival in the summer of 2002.

Rammed in to an unassuming function room of the Crowne Plaza Hotel on the Royal Mile, I realised I’d found my drug. Being sat at the back of a full house of paying punters as the lights go down, the sounds of the first laugh, the moment you see the first ‘lean forward’, even, dare I say, the first ‘nose sniffle’. I’m not saying it was an unmitigated success. There were the bits when people would check their watch, or I would hear bits of my own unformed, untested voice and want to punch myself in the face. But something there worked. One of the actors, Gary Roden (who I’d been mates with since the school plays at Ashfield), was also the Company Manager. We cobbled together a tour of the Midlands and Yorkshire. He’s now General Manager at the Edinburgh Playhouse, one of the biggest theatres in the country. So we must have learnt something.

But then I graduated from university and had no idea how one became a professional playwright and I needed a job My first-ever job when I was younger had been was assisting my stepdad, who was the local window cleaner (well – a window cleaner by day, a self-taught hypnotist by night. Definitely true. He was good too – people would come to the house at night and he’d cure them of smoking and stuff), but he’d since sold his round, so instead I worked at a bar, before ending up as a stage-door keeper at the Nottingham Royal Centre.

I now know that stage-door keepers are unsung heroes of theatre. When I joined Dick, Rita and Rachel there, alternating our shifts, the hours could be extraordinary – sometimes 8 a.m. until 2 a.m. the following morning. The first to arrive, the last to leave, stage-door keepers welcome visiting companies, sort out the dressing rooms, handle enquiries, inevitably get to know the autograph hunters loitering outside, fill up coffee machines for the stage crews, and anything in between. But I loved it. I loved seeing all the shows – from Status Quo rock concerts to touring West End shows. I met a cavalcade of actors, stage managers, musicians, dancers, and I was so taken with how many of those ‘on the circuit’ would know by name our head honcho, Dick, after the sheer number of years he’d been on the door with his acerbic, naughty sense of humour. Coincidentally, I’ve since worked with many of the artists who passed by me during that year. Note to any travelling theatre people: always be nice to the stage-door keeper. They’re elephants. They remember.

The quieter evenings once the shows were up and running gave me time to write, sitting in the little office by the lamp. Having ‘had a play on what I wrote’, I made the classic mistake of just rattling off script after script with little investment, and popping them in envelopes to literary departments across the country – believing, probably, that I must be unique, a freak of nature, twenty-one years old and able to string sentences together! Unsurprisingly, none of these came back. I calmed myself down and committed myself to a single passion piece. A piece loosely about war and violence, the history of fear as a ‘weapon’ (the buzz word in 2003 being WMDs). Having completed this play, I popped it in the post to a little theatre above a pub called the Finborough in Earls’ Court, London – a place I’d never been to, but whose programme seemed to fit with what I was interested in.

I’ll never forget the first time I heard Neil McPherson’s voice. I was on the stage door at the Nottingham Royal Centre and Neil, the Finborough’s Artistic Director, left me a message to phone back. I paced anxiously in Dressing Room One, overlooking Nottingham’s Theatre Square on a bright midweek afternoon as I called him. ‘I want you to know I don’t normally phone,’ he said. ‘What you’ve written is a mess. Completely unproducable. But there’s something there . . . ’ He was probably kinder than that, but that’s the gist. We discussed what might be ‘there’, and I went away and wrote Albert’s Boy, a two-hander (not included in this collection), featuring Einstein and his old friend that explores the guilt he felt at the end of his life over his involvement, scientifically and politically, with the atomic bomb. The Finborough Theatre wanted to produce it. And like Dick Whittington, I tied up a handkerchief of belongings and set off for London ...

Without romanticising this period, I do look back on my first years at the Finborough as an exciting time. The buzz of Albert’s Boy, my first professional show. We cast the legendary Victor Spinetti as Einstein. As we arrived at his Leicester Square flat to persuade him to take the part, he handed over glass after glass of champagne and regaled us with stories of Joan Littlewood and John Lennon – it felt like another world (and it was: not all fringe theatre productions are like this). Neil McPherson, who became my champion, supported me in tackling more ambitious political and historical plays (he’s a great believer in encouraging writers to follow their passions, no matter what the current ‘trends’ are). In Eden’s Empire I looked at the Suez Canal crisis; in Little Madam it was Margaret Thatcher. This was ‘at-the-coalface’ theatre-making, helping to build the sets and, on one occasion, standing with a bucket over my head in the middle of the night as we dealt with a leak during a storm.

During this time I was introduced to a raft of other new writers, young and old, through the Royal Court Young Writers’ programme. My mentor here was the great Simon Stephens, whose enthusiasm and energy know no bounds. I loved discussing with him and the others questions about what drama is, what we loved in plays, what we didn’t. His motivation certainly kept me going in times of doubt. Another saviour was Catherine Johnson who, through the Pearson Playwriting Scheme, sponsored an award that helped keep my head above water while balancing the demands of deadlines with the call any part-time work I could find. And then there’s my agent, Ben Hall, who along with Lily Williams at Curtis Brown, have been invaluable guides.

What can I tell you about the plays in this collection?

Tory Boyz started life, as with many things, as someone else’s idea. Paul Roseby from the (incomparably important and brilliant) National Youth Theatre had seen my gathering political output at the Finborough Theatre and suggested I write a play for them on the subject of Ted Heath. I have to confess that the thought of writing a play about this particular Prime Minister didn’t instantly inspire, least of all for a youth theatre. But Paul rightly saw something in this enigmatic man’s awkwardness in his own skin, his search for (or avoidance of) an identity – another cycle of ‘suggestions’ about his sexuality had recently emerged – that would chime with young actors and a young audience. I just had to find a way in.

My way in was that I had a friend who was gay, northern, and Conservative. Those three traits are not a combination most people would put together, but he introduced me to a world of young, often working-class, and predominantly gay, staff researchers behind the scenes of the Conservative Party, completely contradicting the image of the stuffy old ‘nasty party’. I enjoy anything a bit offbeat or that runs against received perceptions – and with Labour seen as the naturally more tolerant, youthful and liberal-minded wing of politics, I thought this would be an interesting and potentially provocative exploration.

Above and beyond the writing, working with the National Youth Theatre is always an exciting and inspiring experience for a young writer. For a start, you’re liberated from the conventional black-box studio play, ‘five characters only, please’ restraints. Here is an ensemble of twenty, thirty, fifty: take your pick and tell the biggest story you can. It pushes you, challenges you to think bigger, write bigger plays. Inherent in this is the infinite potential for danger and failure too – it’s not for the faint-hearted, but I loved it. Guy Hargreaves directed and I tried to be in the rehearsal room as much as possible: it was such an infectious company. I suppose the subject matter and its tone – hopefully, a non-cynical, open-minded look at Tory people and Tory politics – might have, in some ways, seemed more controversial amongst an older group of professional actors, with lots of political baggage to get over. But the Tory Boyz company carried no such baggage, they were simply open and curious – baffled, in fact, by some of the political and press murmurings about how ‘controversial’ the subject matter was. The show opened at the Soho Theatre, London, in August 2008.

Sons of York was difficult to write and difficult to watch. Thankfully, being back at the Finborough Theatre, back with director Kate Wasserberg, whom I had worked with at the theatre on my earlier pieces, and with one of the loveliest troupes of actors I’ve worked with, it wasn’t difficult to rehearse.

The play is ostensibly set in Hull during the ‘winter of discontent’ of 1978–79, following the trials of a fictional family. But it is essentially based on personal experience – certainly the most autobiographical I have been (despite not having been alive during the period I chose to write about). Having said that, I imagine the trauma the family in this play goes through is universal. The piece explores the relationship between three generations of men: grandfather – father – son. Perhaps it is quite specific to a certain kind of northern, working-class male dynamic, though I doubt it. When my grandmother became ill, I was embarrassed by my own emotional incompetence around my granddad and my dad. I recall the moment – as depicted in the play – when my granddad made the impossible decision of ‘letting his wife go’. He, my dad and I were sitting in his (now slightly more empty) living room together: the heaviness of three generations of men sitting in the same room, having experienced the same distress, though to all intents and purposes slightly alone with it, unable to share it and connect. There was no ‘language’ for that pain. No precedent. How men share pain became a preoccupation and driving impulse behind Sons of York.

Regardless of its cathartic qualities for me personally, I suppose I was chiefly proud of this as a piece for combining the political with the personal in a way that all the work I most admire does. Setting a family at a crossroads against the backdrop of a nation that is likewise at a turning point in its political and social development. Tipping points are always the best time and place to set plays, I think . . .

A History of Falling Things took me to Clwyd Theatr Cymru in Mold, north Wales. It was a slightly different direction for me (the play, not Wales – though that, too) in that it wasn’t directly related to, or inspired by, real or historical events. Essentially, it’s a relationship drama. A love story. From a simple almanack book I got as a stocking-filler present, I had discovered keraunothnetophobia – a fear of falling satellites. I was so fascinated by this – being afraid of something falling from the sky and crushing you – I was determined to use it, though I had no idea at the time how. I was quite a ‘frightened’ child. Many of Robin’s annoying, irrational anxieties resemble my own.

The Whisky Taster was a play that, like the best single malts, took longer to gestate and arrive than any other. In various guises and forms, I’d been tinkering with the idea for the play for about five years before it hit the stage. Sometimes you just have to let it sit, I guess.

When I first moved to London during the run-up to my first Finborough outing, I got a job as an office assistant in a theatre press and marketing agency run by Guy Chapman (who, having previously worked at the Royal Court and being something of a new writing pioneer himself, has been a great supporter). It gave me a taste of the world of advertising. One of the guys in Marketing there was afflicted/gifted/suffered from (however you choose to see it) this remarkable quality called synaesthesia, whereby he had a physical or emotional response to colours – though it can equally be a connection to sounds, tastes, you name it . . . Wanting to write a play about being the age I was, in the city I was in, feeling, as I did, that sometimes the whole thing was just too loud and too colourful, the prospect of the play began emerging and went from there. I relate strongly to the character of Barney, who sometimes wishes the world were a more numbing black and white, but ultimately knows there is no life without colour, despite the pain that may come your way as a result.

I’m not sure how other writers approach rehearsals, but I’m always open to and excited by the prospect of reworking and rewriting the text as a response to what happens in the room. It’s a balancing act – standing by your original vision while having an openness toward new discoveries. After spending so much of the creative process in your own cocoon, this is when it gets fun. I relished these months, rehearsing with a cast whose own wisdom, inquisitiveness and talent gave me a steady stream of new ideas: spending evenings in the pub with director James Grieve, hammering out what we thought the story was, or should be; the support and advice from Josie Rourke and the rest of the team at the Bush Theatre – at the time located at its old premises above the pub on a corner of Shepherd’s Bush Green, but since moved to a new home in the old library.

The Man was something of a happy accident. Again at the Finborough, Neil McPherson was programming a series of readings and workshops to mark the theatre’s thirtieth anniversary. I’d agreed to lead one, and then, as the time drew near, I began to panic. Using that sense of panic, I eventually just dived straight in and wrote very quickly about that other task that sends me into a fit of anxiety – filling in my tax return. Being a self-employed writer, a self-assessment form is one of the downsides that no one tells you about. For me though, the trauma lies, not so much in the form itself (although that’s no day out in the park), but in going through all your receipts from the previous year to see what can be used as expenses and what can’t. The first time I did this, I couldn’t believe how emotionally draining the whole thing was. Within my shoe box and shopping bags of crumpled receipts were memories of relationship break-ups, family deaths, career successes, career failures, new people, love found, love lost. In twelve monthly piles of receipts lies a person’s biography. A shame perhaps that, for everything we’ve done or felt, we probably paid for something while we were doing or feeling it. I dread going through it every year . . .

With the help and support of director Kate Wasserberg, I performed The Man initially myself – largely because the spontaneity demanded (whereby it is members of the audience who pass the actor receipts in no particular order, so that the arrangement of the memories is different every time) made it seem too complicated and too unfair to pass on to a ‘proper’ actor with so little time. As this wasn’t a complete disaster, when it came to mounting the show in full at the Finborough in summer 2010 I played the role again alongside a handful of brilliant, open and patient actors – Samuel Barnett, Leander Deeny and George Rainsford, who deserve a mention for being brave enough to take on the task of going out on stage every night not knowing in what order your emotional journey is going to play out – but all the more rewarding for it.

It is tempting for writers looking back on their early work to want to edit out the now-perceived flaws. But to do this would be to do so for the wrong reasons. Vanity, mainly – wishing that we knew then what we know now, with greater experience, a stronger sense of what we want to achieve and how to achieve it. Maybe. As they stand, the works collected here represent where, and what, and how I was, when I was writing them. As a playwright, you have to make your mistakes in front of people. That’s theatre. And I wouldn’t change it for anything.


JAMES GRAHAM





Tory Boyz





Cast List


Tory Boyz was first first performed by the National Youth Theatre Company at the Soho Theatre, London, on 21 July 2008. The cast was as follows:

Sam

Shaun Rivers



Nicholas

Dan Ings



Nina

Sair Khan



Robbie

James Camp



James

Sam Marks



Douglas

Chris Greenwood



Ted Heath

Hamish McDougall



Mrs Heath

Clare Harlow



Miss Locke

Beatrice Walker



Timothy

Robert Willoughby



Frank

Dan Walton



Kay

Alice Bailey Johnson



Tommo

Sope Dirisu



Shayne

Tom Aslett



Muznah

Laura Marston



Heather

Mia Hatfield



Michelle

Clara Nortey



Ray

Daniel Ward



Adam

Louis Lasa Tarbuck



Young Teddy

James Musgrave



Young John

Robert Willoughby



Young Kay

Mia Hatfield



Kids

James Camp, Sair Khan Dan Walton, Chris Greenwood



Director Guy Hargreaves

Lighting Designer David Kidd

Video Designer John Lloyd-Fillingham

Sound Designer Jonathan Jones





Characters


Sam, Parliamentary Researcher, male, twenty-three. North West

Nicholas, Chief of Staff, late twenties. South East

Nina, personal assictant, twenty-two. London

Robbie, intern, nineteen. London

James, Labour Parliamentary Researcher, twenties

Douglas, librarian

Tommo, male, fifteen/sixteen. GCSE student

Shayne, male, fifteen/sixteen. GCSE student

Muznah, female, fifteen/sixteen. GCSE student

Heather, female, fifteen/sixteen. GCSE student

Michelle, female, fifteen/sixteen. GCSE student

Ray, male, fifteen–sixteen. GCSE student

Adam, male, fifteen/sixteen. GCSE student

Teaching Assistant

Ted Heath, Joint Deputy Whip, male, thirties

Mrs Heath, Ted’s mother, twenties/ thirties

Miss Locke, Ted’s piano teacher, seventeen

Timothy, Junior Whip, male, twenties

Frank, Junior Whip, male, twenties

Kay, Ted’s friend, female, thirties

Young Teddy / Teenage Teddy

Young John

Young Kay

Kids

Many of the roles can be doubled – for example, the modern-day GCSE students can become the younger children of the 1950s (as indicated in the text), Librarians can be Junior Whips and so on, or alternatively just one actor can be cast per individual part.





Note on the text


A slash mark (/) indicates the character with the next line should begin speaking, overlapping with the preceding dialogue.

(Text within a bracket) indicates that the line should be spoken softly or internalised.





Spotlight on a music stand, holding song sheets.

Ted Heath enters to applause. He bows to the audience. The applause dies. He turns to face the dark stage.

As he flicks his baton, individual parts of the scene light up, accompanied by a musical instrument – for example, one flick lights a desk lamp, accompanied by a flute, before darkness again. Another lights a phone, which sounds a ring. Another, a spot on the filing cabinet accompanied by a tuba, etc., as though the ‘scene’ were an orchestra warming up.

Objects and areas begin to light up of their own accord, interrupting each other.

Ted taps the stand for silence, regaining control.

He lifts his arms grandly . . . and begins. Characters enter and are ‘conducted’ by Ted. Parliamentary researchers answer phones, open filing cabinets; schoolchildren fight, dance, play . . . The music reaches a climax, Ted drops his arms, the music cuts out, and he disappears.



Sam’s office, the Houses of Parliament.

Two desks. Computer, phone, papers scattered around. A few chairs. A closed door to an adjoining office. A flip chart with a handwritten list of secondary schools (some crossed off), unions and associations including NUT, NASUWT, NAHT, GTC, ASCL and ATL. Sam is at his desk, on the phone, in mid-flow. . .

Sam . . . So in principle, yes, just concerns over implementation. And resources, of course.

Nicholas, Chief of Staff, enters, slovenly, sighing, holding a packet of crisps, a bottle of water and a tabloid newspaper, which he tosses on to a nearby desk.

Nicholas (yawning) Well, that was a bag of wank. (Sees Sam on the phone.) Sorry.

Sam And what about our proposal for money to follow the pupil rather than it going direct to the school? Great. Well. Thanks for your time. That’s been really useful. Thanks. Bye.

Nicholas (stretching, referencing the flip chart) Ticking them off, Sammy boy?

Sam (puts the phone down and stands, crossing a name off the list) Yep.

Nicholas The hell is NASUWT again? National –

Sam National Association of Schoolteachers’ – Union of Women Teachers –

Nicholas La-lah la-lah la-lah. NUT, GLT, ABC, one two three. Jesus Christ, I’m bollocksed, man. Never a good night’s sleep, Sundays, is it. And I’ve just had (dramatically) ‘the morning from hell’. So. (Slumps into a chair. Swivels.) Fucking. ‘N-U-T’. Urgh. Laugh a minute, it was not. If you can, do, if you’re a cock, teach. (Opening his crisps. Looking at his paper.) Usual moans. Micro-management. Short-term thinking bla bla bla. Heading to the Village drinks tonight?

Sam Offered to do a stint at the press office.

Nicholas laughs, shaking his head.

Sam Fuck does that mean?

Nicholas Means you make me laugh, Sam. ’Bout Humphrey’s civil what’s-it thing this afternoon? Partnership. Upstairs. What are they called if it’s . . . ?

Sam Called weddings, Nicholas. And I’m at the school, aren’t I? And why would I be going? Don’t even know him.

Nicholas No, but I . . .

Sam What do you . . . ? Why . . . ? It’s not some club, Nick. You don’t just go along because –

Nicholas All right, Tetchy Von Sensitive. (As ‘street’.) Take a chill-pill, in’ it. (Beat.) Well. Have fun at your school today. (Chuckles.) What is it, one of the goods or the bads?

Sam Uh, middle.

Nicholas (referencing the adjoining office) Is he in?

Sam No, he’s still in committee.

Nicholas Oh, Shizer Chiefs. Well, he’ll be a delight this afternoon then. (With the paper.) Urgh. Questions, questions. Since when was the front page about asking questions instead of just reporting the fucking news? ‘More Poles in Britain than British?’ No.

Phone rings. Sam answers.

Sam Hello?

Nicholas ‘Is there a paedophile in your son’s bedroom right / now?’ No, it’s all fine, actually, thanks. Just carry on.

Sam Four o’clock. OK. Bye. (Phone down.)

Nina enters. Nicholas stands to greet her with mock-adoration.

Nina Afternoon.

Nicholas Ah, there she is. How are we, how are we? What’s that?

Nina Baguette.

Nicholas (imitating) ‘Baguette.’ What kind? / What kind of baguette?

Nina (handing to Sam) Here, OFSTED. Rest are online.

Sam Ta.

Nina Tuna Niçoise.

Nicholas Tuna Niçoise, très bon, très bon. (Taking her hand and holding it out, looking at her outfit.) Like this little number, today, Nina. (As Jim Carrey.) ‘I like it a lot.’

Nina Worn it before, dead old.

Nicholas First time I’ve seen it, though.

He spins her as he sings. Nina laughs and groans, not fully cooperating.

Nicholas ‘The first time . . . ever I saw your face.’

Nina Do you mind?

Nicholas (looking at her hand, gasping playfully) And what is this, Nina, Nina, ballerina, no ring, no ring, on your pretty little finger, oh no! Weekend in the Cotswolds not go quite to plan, this is terrible. Time you moved on, eh Sam?

Nina Look, it’s fine, yeah? Just –

Nicholas Sam’s in one of them, today.

Sam In what?

Nicholas In one of them moods.

Sam I’m busy, if that’s what you mean.

Nicholas No, that isn’t what I mean, but never mind. (Sympathetic groan.) Oh, Nina.

Nina Genuinely don’t want to talk about it, and I’m gonna get annoyed in a sec. So.

Nicholas Well /. . . (Wanders, opening his bottle of water.) I had a fabulous weekend, children. I went to that guy’s restaurant, near the ’rents house, in lovely Berkshire, and I cannot quite describe to you this menu. / It had –

Sam Whose restaurant is it?

Nicholas What’s his face’s – (The baguette.) That absolutely stinks, Nina.

Nina Deal with it. Whose restaurant?

Nicholas Thingy McShit. Cries over chickens, curly hair. Blooming . . . Bloomingdale.

Nina Blumenthal.

Nicholas Blumenthal.

Sam You’re thinking of Whittingstall. Curly hair.

Nicholas No, this is Bloomingdale.

Nina/ Sam Blumenthal.

Nicholas Blumenthal! Fuck’s sake! Right. Listen to this. (Holds out his left hand.) Bacon. (Holds out his right hand.) Ice cream. (Puts his ‘hands’ together as ‘one’.)

Nina Bollocks.

Nicholas Na-ah. Na-ah. Bacon ice cream. (As Peter Kay.) ‘I’ve tasted it, it’s the future.’

Sam Sounds ridiculous.

Nicholas You’re ridiculous.

Nina I don’t believe you.

Nicholas Don’t care if you believe me, I’m not saying it to impress you, I’m saying it to inform you. Whether or not you learn and grow is up to you.

Robbie enters, apologetically.

Robbie Nina, sorry. You’ve got a, um –

Nicholas Ah-ha! And who’s this? Our next intern extraordinaire ?

Nina Robbie, Nicholas; Nicholas, Robbie. Don’t listen to a word he says.

Nicholas ‘Don’t listen to a . . . ’ (Tuts.) Hi. Robbie. (Shaking.) Nicholas. And you know Saint Sam-u-el over here?

Robbie Uh, yeah, we, we briefly. Met. Uh, Nina, sorry, there’s a photographer from the Observer outside.

Nicholas A what? Why?

Robbie He says he’s here for something else, some ceremony thing.

Nicholas Oh, yeah, Shadow Health, civil partnership. This afternoon.

Robbie He wants to quickly nab a pic of the office if he can?

Nina Why? / No, he can . . .

Nicholas Ah! (Mock ‘ner-ner’ childish) ‘I know what it is.’ It’s thingy Ted Heath again. Fella gossiping on the Today programme this morning. Dredging it up.

Robbie Saying what?

Nicholas Saying he was gay again.

Sam (Fuck’s sake.)

Nina What’s that got to do with us?

Nicholas This used to be his office.

Nina Did it? I didn’t know that.

Nicholas One of them. Once upon a time. (Making to leave with Nina.)

Nina Why didn’t I know that?

Nicholas Jesus Neen, every office used to be someone else’s and these have been offices for centuries, we’re probably breathing in about twenty dead Prime Ministers.

Nina and Nicholas leave. Robbie watches them go, unsure whether or not to stay. Sam has a glance at him before continuing to shift, staple, move, sign, etc.

Robbie So. You’re not your average Tory.

Sam Really.

Robbie You’ve got an accent.

Sam Ah. You’ve got an accent.

Robbie You’ve got a northern accent.

Nicholas has re-entered.

Sam / Yes. I do.

Nicholas Shame, he’s buggered off. Do what?

Sam Yes, I do have a northern accent.

Nicholas Yeah, sorry about him, he’s like a genetic deformity. And there’s no cure, unfortunately. Me, though, I’m true blue. Home Counties, cricket and rugger, father in the military, huzzah. That more what you expected?

Robbie Pretty much. (Beat.) So. Ted Heath was gay, then? God.

Nicholas Who fucking knows? No one, that’s who. Just talk, mate.

Sam Why ‘God’?

Robbie Dunno. Gay Prime Minister. You’d think you would have heard. And Conservative as well.

Nicholas Lesson one, Robert, the Tory Party is the gayest of them all. Reckon we’ve more gay party members, staff, councillors, etc., than anyone else. ’Specially in London.

Robbie I’ve never met a gay Tory.

Nicholas Sam’s gay.

Robbie Are you?

Sam shoots Nicholas a look. Short pause.

Sam If it matters.

Nicholas Oy, no one’s saying it matt – Fucking, the boy was only asking, Mr Prickly. He might be gay, all we know. Are you?

Robbie Uh. (Pause. Shrugs.) Dunno. A bit.

Nicholas (laughs) What?

Robbie (pause; laughs, embarrassed.) Sorry. That was a weird thing to . . . I don’t . . . know what I meant, sorry, it – I . . .

Nicholas (pause, unnerved he may have crossed a line) No, that’s . . . don’t – Sorry, I shouldn’t have . . . (Pause.) No, there’s a, um . . . isn’t there, Sam, a, like a Westminster gay night. Tonight. Monthly gay – well, it’s not just Westminster any more but, you know, lots of . . . very popular. Even the straight ones feel obliged.

Robbie God, never would have imagined.

Nicholas And you should see the gay disco at the end of the party conference. Something to, uh . . . behold. So. Anyway, how, how you finding it, all right?

Robbie Yeah, just been, you know. Coffee and photocopying, but –

Nicholas Well, it doesn’t get much more exciting than that, I’m afraid. The West Wing, this ain’t. You had a tour of the place?

Robbie Yeah, a brief one. It’s weird. Loads of cafés, and gyms and bars. / So many bars.

Nicholas (laughs) Did you see the Sports and Social? Where the old school Labours meet to guzzle down their real ale. We tend to go Bellamy’s, don’t we?

Sam is busy.

Nicholas Well, Sam doesn’t have a life, but you’ll likely find a lot of us lot there.

Robbie Yeah, and that’s what’s . . . I can’t – You’re all so young.

Nicholas Hire that man! (Laughs.) No, it’s because, in all seriousness, the pay’s pretty rubbish. Just to warn you. The MPs, they nab us as graduates desperate to get on any ladder as researchers, PAs, dogsbodies, and by the time we hit our late-twenties we’re bored and underpaid and so we leave or get headhunted and off we pop to earn some real money. I’ll be leaving soon, God willing. But Sam here, he’s been told he could have the pick of the bunch if he stays. CRD. CCHQ.

Nina re-enters.

Nina Those reports are ready for binding, Robbie, if you want.

Robbie Uh, yeah. Cool. Sorry. Thank you. (Exits.)

Nina perches on her desk, eating her baguette. Sam is still busying around them.

Nicholas raises an eyebrow at Nina.

Nina (chuckling) What?

Nicholas Nice, your boy there.

Nina Piss off. Just nice to have someone being keen for a change.

Nicholas Oh God, he’s not one of these that ‘believes’ in things, is he?

Sam I believe in things.

Nicholas That’s what I mean.

Sam gets a text message on his phone. He reads it.

Nicholas (Can’t be doing with two fucking Gandhis, drive me nuts.)

Sam It’s him.

Nina and Nicholas stand into ‘work’ mode. A distinct sense of efficiency now.

Nicholas What’s he need?

Sam (reading) ‘Trust School, Hertfordshire, question mark, parent co-op, name and results asap. Can’t find.’

Nicholas (moving to computer but pointing behind him to files as he goes) In there?

Nina (retrieving them) No, he took them up, I’m sure.

Nicholas (sits at computer, pointing to the flip chart) And not one of them on the board?

Sam No, they’re all comps and old ones at that.

Nicholas (typing) I’ll get the name, then Sam you phone for results.

Sam (with a BlackBerry) They’ll be listed on the website. / (What was the name?)

Nicholas Ah, Wikipedia, what would we do without you?

Sam (searching her files) I wanna say St Mary’s, St M-m-m –

Nicholas (reading the screen) Actually, I’ll check local newspapers.

Nina (with lists, running her finger down) Hertfordshire schools, here.

Nicholas Good.

Sam (found it) Got it. St Mary’s-in-the-Field. Local Resident Trust School, established ’07.

Nicholas Eureka. (Begins typing.)

Nina Got it as well. (Phone number . . .) (As he dials on the phone.)

Nicholas Here we go. (Searching screen.) Results, results. Come on. Shit, shit, shit.

Sam (pointing to the screen) There. (Texting as he reads.)

Nicholas Well done, well done.

Nina We good? (Putting the phone down.)

Nicholas Sam?

Sam (sending the message) Yep.

Nicholas (reading) And doing very well. Seventy-two per cent grades A–C, blimey.

Sam OK. Sent.

Nicholas Whew! (Standing.) Well done, ladies. (Stretching.) Fuck, think that’s me done for the day now, Jesus.

Robbie enters again.

Robbie Nina, sorry, there’s / a –

Nicholas Stop apologising, Robbie, this is the House of Commons for Christ’s sake.

Robbie Oh. OK, sorry. Nina, there’s a call for you.

Nina Thank you. (Exits.)

Robbie (to Nicholas) Sorry. (Exits.)

Nicholas ‘Sorry.’ ‘Sorry.’ Jesus. Apologises more than Boris.

Sam Thanks for that.

Nicholas What?

Sam Earlier.

Nicholas What the fuck is your fucking problem today? Go get some lunch.

Sam He’s still in there, might text down again.

Nicholas I’m on it. (Drinking some more water. Watching him.) Oy.

Sam What?

Nicholas Be happier.

Sam Be . . . ? I don’t know what that means. What does that mean?

Nicholas You know what that means. Be nicer. He was only trying to be nice.

Sam I was only trying to be nice.

Nicholas Try harder. (Beat. Drinks.) Sam? (Serious.) Try harder. When you get this busy you get distracted with people. Forget minor courtesies.

Sam Like what?

Nicholas Like smiling. Remember what it was to smile, Sam?

Sam I’m smiling now.

Nicholas Smiles have teeth, Sam. See. (Smiles.)

Sam smiles a grotesquely ‘teethy’ grin.

Nicholas mimics him, more grotesquely, and Sam mimics him back. They stop, and smile genuinely at each for a sec over the silliness of this, before returning.

Nicholas Oy.

Sam sighs, looking up again.

Nicholas He isn’t a threat. He’s just a boy.

Sam (beat, stops what he’s doing) Now I’m really sure I don’t know what that means.

A moment, Sam and Nicholas looking at each other, Nicholas swigging from his bottle. Robbie enters and smiles, waiting as though to continue whatever it was they were doing before. Nicholas makes to leave.

Nicholas Sam, as you’re clearly not going to lunch, why not give Roberto here a whirlwind tour of the life of a parliamentary researcher. I’ll be upstairs.

Nicholas leaves. Sam continues with his work for a while.

Robbie So he’s your boss.

Sam He’s the Chief of Staff. Michael One has four –

Robbie (pointing to the adjoining office) Michael One?

Sam No. Two Michaels. Michael Pritchard upstairs, Shadow Secretary of State for Schools, Children and Families. Michael Two is Daikens, the minister underneath him. I’m Michael Two’s Researcher, Nina his PA and Nicholas is Chief of Staff.

Robbie (momentarily stunned by the sharpness of the answer) ’K. And what do you do?

Sam (confused) You a first-year undergrad?

Robbie Will be. Just done my A Levels. Dad’s Honorary Chairman of Reading West association. Thought it’d be good me getting some experience.

Sam PPE?

Robbie Yeah. In Hull. Wherever the fuck that is. Didn’t even go to the open day.

Sam End of the M62, east coast. After you pass (what is it?) Pontefract, it’s like the only thing left at the end. So by that point all the cars on the road have to be going to Hull or else drive straight on into the North Sea. Which to be fair, when they see Hull, a lot of people actually do.

Robbie laughs.

Sam Hmm-hmm. (See. Happy, jokes . . .)

Robbie So, why, like, do the government listen to you lot and, you know, table your amendments into the Bill?

Sam If the government wants a Bill to become law it might need MPs from our party to vote for it. Which we’re more likely to do if we’ve amended it to our liking at committee stage, currently under way. Plus, God forbid we may actually have some good ideas.

Robbie Gotcha. OK. Uh. So. Do you reckon he was gay then or what? Ted Heath.

Sam I don’t think it changes anything, do you?

Robbie Why do you think he kept it hidden? If he was, I mean.

Sam Well, I would have thought that was obvious. He wanted to be Prime Minister. But things have moved on.

Robbie Cool. Cool. What things?

Sam (‘What things.’) People. The country, the party, those things.

Robbie So it’s never been a problem? For you, I mean. Being here.

Sam Hasn’t yet – Is that everything? Or . . . ?

Robbie Oh. Um. (Beat.) Well. Maybe I’ll see you at that drinks thing tonight. Maybe.

Sam No I’m doing a stint in the press office. Always got to be someone on late. Case the Queen dies or something.

Robbie Right-oh. Oh well. (Beat.) I’d better . . . get back to it, then.

Sam (smiling, dryly) Okey-dokey

Pause. Robbie leaves. Sam has gathered his things and closes up his bag.

Ted Heath appears, faintly, almost an apparition, on the phone at the opposite desk. His voice like an echo, hardly distinguishable. Sam watches before exiting.



House of Commons Library.

Douglas, an assistant librarian, is collecting some papers. Sam enters.

Douglas Hullo.

Sam Hi. Erm. I just have . . . (Unfolding a note and handing it over.) Couple of extra reports for Michael we need pulling, if that’s OK.

Douglas Roger, roger. Pick up tomorrow morning, all right?

Sam Thanks. (Making to leave. Stops. Awkward.) Douglas, you . . . you’ve not been . . . you haven’t heard anything about this new, uh . . . new Ted Heath stuff? Have you?

Douglas Oh. I don’t pay attention to gossip, Sam. I’m surrounded by one of the most comprehensive banks of knowledge imaginable. Why waste time with rumour when I can make a withdrawal of hard facts? (Laughs.)

Sam OK. Cool.

Douglas Course I will say this. My granddad always used to speak very highly of him.

Sam Oh yes, of course, ’cause he –

Douglas Nearly thirty years here. Left when the Lady came to power. Now, he did say he was a very private man, hard to know unless he . . . you know, unless he let you in. Nice enough. But . . . you know. One of them. Bit funny.

Sam Right. (Right.) Uh, thanks, Douglas. (Exiting.)

Douglas I could give you a couple of interesting exhibits, mind. If you were . . . interested.

Sam stops. Turns. Considers. . .



A music classroom. Secondary school.

Some chairs, a couple of tables. A piano, keyboard, drum kit, other instruments dotted around. Noise approaching from outside. Tommo bursts in and tosses his rucksack in anger. He’s followed in by Ray, Shayne and Muznah. laughing

Tommo Just fuck off, yeah?

Ray Shit, man, that was fucking ace!

Muznah No lie, that is the most hilarious thing I / have ever seen. Fact!

Ray Serious, bruv! You gotta come see, he’s still down.

Tommo I ain’t going back out there, no way, no fucking way.

Shayne Why not, he can’t hit for shit, man. Clearly. / You had him.

Tommo He’ll knock me out next time, swear.

Muznah Don’t be a fool, he just knocked himself out, innit.

Ray (laughing clapping his hands and hopping around) I cannot believe, cannot believe.

Shayne (joining him and slapping hands, pissing himself) Shit man . . .

Tommo Yeah, you laugh, it’s all right for you, innit.

Tommo sits down at a drum kit and begins bashing, kicking it. Heather and Michelle enter.

Heather What just happened?

Muznah / Tommo, yeah –

Michelle Why the fuck is Trip lying / lying on the ground?

Heather Tommo?

Ray No, he didn’t do nothing, he didn’t get a chance. Trip punched himself vn the head!

Michelle What?

Ray Swear to God. He squares up to Tommo, yeah –

Tommo Ray, leave it!

Ray Proper up in his face, giving it all sumfin about Tommo’s brother and Trip’s sister –

Shayne Bruv, / is it true? Your Mark and his sister?

Ray Tommo pushes him, and we’re all like, ‘Fuck man.’

Michelle Serious, / you pushed Trip?

Ray Tommo’s gonna die, yeah? Trip pulls his arm back, like this, ready to go in, but he obviously didn’t reckon on Rocky having knocked him so hard, wobbling, right? And he goes in . . . (laughing, imitating) punches himself, back of the head.

Michelle and Heather burst into hysterics. Even Tommo smiles now. Michelle heads over to a stereo player and takes a CD from her bag, still laughing.

Shayne (slaps Tommo on the chest) Fuck, man, you’re like, the only person to ever knock Trip to the ground, you should be high / as a kite.

Tommo He knocked himself to the ground!

Muznah Man, you gotta get back out there, take a bow. (As a boxing call.) ‘The undefeated champion of the / wooorld!’

Tommo Fuck that, no way.

Heather (looking out through the door) Eh, he’s up, walking around now.

Tommo (pacing, afraid) Awh shit, man. Shit.

Heather Smedley’s with him.

Shayne (calling out) ‘Fattie.’ / ‘Fattie Smeders!’

Muznah Ah, Trip looks well embarrassed. / He’s bright red!

Ray He fucking should be. (Imitates punching himself again.)

Heather Adam’s here.

Ray (running over) Wait. Shh.

Michelle Heather, how did we miss that? Gutted!

Ray has run to hide behind the door. Adam walks in. Ray jumps him, playfully but aggressively, from behind, trying to mount him.

Ray Yo Adam, man!

Adam Argh, fuck off, Ray!

Ray Oh come on, you know you like it, don’t lie. You’ve gotta be true to yourself, innit.

Adam (scrambling free) Fuck off! Serious. Takes the piss. Why does he do it, why? Gay.

Ray You’re gay.

Adam You are.

Michelle has selected Dizzie Rascal’s ‘Dance Wiv Me’ on the CD player, which now plays. Everyone except Tommo and Adam jump and whoop as they begin to dance around. Michelle skips forward in the song and turns it up loud before joining them. Shayne sits at the drum and begins bashing

Sam enters with a Teaching Assistant. One by one Adam, Heather, Michelle, Tommo, Muznah and finally Ray clock him and stop. Michelle stops the music.

Teaching Assistant 5b?

Michelle Yeah.

Teaching Assistant (to Sam) 5b. The clipboard’s over there and, uh . . . (handing him marker pens.) keep hold of these. I’ll leave you to it. (Exits.)

Sam Thank you. (Pause. Surveys the scene.) Hey.

Shayne Hey.

Michelle Hello.

Sam I’m Sam. How you all doing, all right?

Michelle All right, thank you. How are you?

Ray Are you our politician man?

Sam I am your politician man, yes. Except I’m not a politician.

Muznah But you work for the Government, innit.

Sam No, I don’t work for the Government. I work for the Opposition. But I do work in the Houses of Parliament.

Ray Like Big Ben?

Sam Well, the palace where Big Ben is, yes. Big Ben is actually the name of the bell but –

Ray The bell? Like Tommo, he’s a bell. (Laughs.)

Shayne Eh, you know the bottom of a bell, sir, do you call that the ‘bell-end’?

Sam I’m a researcher for the Conservative Party on schools and children. In fact I’m, I’m one of four people who knows more about Conservative educational policy than anyone else in the country. So . . .

Muznah (sarcastic, mock-interested) Is it?

They all snigger.

Shayne Wait, you’re a Tory? Awh, man. I thought we was gonna get a Labour.

Ray Aren’t Tories all posh and old, sir?

Sam No, I’m a Tory, do I sound posh or look old?

Tommo No, you sound a bit like a pikey

Michelle hits him.

Sam I’m from Liverpool.

Ray Ain’t that a right shit-hole?

Sam No more than anywhere else.

Tommo (trying to imitate a Liverpudlian accent) ‘Hello. I’m from Liverpool. Go on, Redknapp. Go on, Gerrard. Ay, ay, ay.’

Sam Yes, that’s. Very good. Erm . . .

Ray So why’d you go pick the losing team, bruv?

Sam I’m sorry?

Ray Why didn’t you choose to work for the Government, ain’t that better?

Sam I don’t believe in the Labour Party’s principles.

Muznah My dad says that you’re all the same now. And that you’re all shit.

Michelle Muz!

Sam No, don’t worry, you can say what you like. I’m not a politician. That’s the point. My job is to find the truth. It’s why I’m here.

Michelle So we ain’t got to do music for a month, sir?

Sam Please don’t call me sir. Did Mrs Gillon not explain why I was here?

Heather A little bit.

Tommo It’s cos Mr Lucas has got rabies, innit.

Sam Your music teacher hasn’t got rabies. But he is away for a couple of weeks. So we handpicked you guys to help us out with a little project. It’s actually quite a cool thing, you erm . . . well you get to have your voices heard and input into things that could one day become law. So . . .

Heather What about our music GCSE, we gotta pass it, haven’t we?

Sam Well that’s why you were chosen by Mrs Gillon, as students who are excelling and could afford to miss three or four lessons.

Shayne (spurts laughter) Not Raymondo. He needs all the help he can get.

Ray Fuck you!

Sam Oy, come on now.

Michelle It’s true, Ray, you is pretty shit.

Ray Yeah, laugh it up, cause one day you gonna be seeing me spinning decks in the clubs you pay fifty fucking quid to get into, innit.

Shayne Yeah right, you can’t even play ‘Frère Jacques’.

Everyone laughs.

Ray heads over to the piano and sits at it.

Ray Yeah, all right, fuck you all! Watch this.

Sam OK, come on everyone.

Ray I’ll show you ‘Frère Jacques’. I’m gonna Frère Jacques the fuck out of this.

(Plays a note.) Wait.

(Plays a couple of notes.) Wait.

(Plays a note.) Wait.

(Plays the first bit, goes wrong.) Wait.

Ray plays ‘Frère Jacques’ on the piano, clunkily slowly, but gets through it. Slamming down on the keys, and standing victoriously.

Ray Yes! Recognise.

Sam OK, well done. / Now. Can we –

Ray Eat your heart out, Stevie Wonder. (Imitates Stevie Wonder on an air piano)

Sam All right, could we, like, grab chairs and sit down please. Like . . . yeah, in a circle, or . . .

The gang slovenly gather chairs and place them around, sitting

Sam Whatever. Cool. Thank you. So. Essentially. I’m here because, one, I’m interested in getting your opinions on a couple of matters, and, and two, because, as I’m sure you, you may or may not agree, young people are often excluded from the political system or just, or feel disillusioned with the whole thing. More of you, when you reach voting age – you’re like, what? Fifteen, sixteen?

Adam / Tommo / Michelle Sixteen.

Ray / Shayne / Heather / Muznah Fifteen.

Sam Right, so when you reach voting age, more of you will choose to vote in The X Factor than at the next general election.

Muznah That’s because what’s the point, nothing changes.

Shayne So what’s your job then? What do you do?

Sam goes to a flip chart and turns the sheet over. A drawing of a penis is there. The students burst into laughter, accusing and congratulating each other. They laugh into silence as they watch Sam, waiting to see what he’ll say or do.

He smiles slightly, and nods, as he draws a line from the ‘slit’ of the penis drawing all the way down the penis, splitting it into left and right. He then begins to colour one side in red, half the other in blue, and the bottom half in yellow.

Sam The House of Commons. The Government at the moment are Labour, because they have more MPs in the Commons than Tories, here, and other parties here. MPs from the government side form a Cabinet with each of them taking on different departments, whether it be ‘Health’ (writing, and so on), ‘Defence’, ‘Schools’, ‘Culture’ and so on. But for every cabinet minister they have, we in the Opposition have what’s called a Shadow Minister. So we have our Shadow Defence Minister, Shadow Culture, to formulate alternative policies, challenge and also in some cases support their opposite numbers. I research for the Shadow Schools Minister.

Adam What do you research?

Ray (mock-gay) ‘What do you research?’

Sam Hey. Please. So, um . . . so at this point in time, the Government has produced a pretty far-reaching Schools Bill with things that will affect if not you then those slightly younger than you, their daily lives. Do you know what a Bill is?

Muznah Not like a phone bill?

Ray Idiot.

Muznah I / was joking, dickhead.

Sam When ministers are formulating policies they’ll normally submit a ‘Green Paper’ –

Michelle What’s that?

Sam It’s like a first draft of ideas. Then they get feedback from people within the industry in question, so like schools, hospitals, whatever, and then redraft the Green Paper into a White Paper. More consultation, until finally the minister in question will submit a ‘Bill’ to the House.

Ray Not a phone bill, Muz.

Muznah One more time! I / was joking, cock-nose!

Sam A Bill. . . OK, a Bill is a possible future law, but before the MPs can vote we go into committee stage. That’s what we’re in now. / Which –

Shayne Which is?

Sam It’s where the Opposition MPs, i.e. my guys, can try and make changes to the Government’s proposed law, based on what we want and what the people we’ve spoken to want. The idea being we all try and get the law as near perfect as possible before we all vote. If more MPs vote for it to become an Act of Parliament than not, then it becomes law. So –

Tommo Sir, did you vote for the Iraq war?

Sam I’m not a Member of Parliament, I’m just a member of the public. And please call me Sam. What I want to find out about is what you think to some of the things we’re debating in this Bill. Lowering the voting age for you guys, reorganising the curriculum. Things such as raising the school-leaving age –

Muznah What?!

Sam So I was thinking we could form our own cabinet, if you like. To debate ideas. Like the real one. We each take a role. So someone will need to be Prime Minister –

Ray I will!

Michelle No way.

Sam Which we’ll vote on. Someone to be Education, Health, so on. And see how we go.

Ray Michelle, why not me?

Heather I think Tommo.

Shayne No, he needs to be Defence, so he can protect us from Trip. (Laughs)

Michelle Is culture like dance and sport and all that? That’s the one I want.

Sam OK, so. Next week, why not come prepared with your top two preferred positions, uh, and we’ll vote. Or something.

Heather Are we gonna get like a certificate for this or something?

Sam Well, you’ll get to contribute to Conservative Party policy.

Heather Yeah, I want a certificate.

Tommo (to Shayne) Oy, get the fuck out of my bag!

Shayne I need a pen, knob-rash!

Tommo tries to snatch his rucksack back, and Shayne stands, holding it out tauntingly. Shayne goes to get it, and a chase ensues, with the others leaping to their feet and running round in a circle after Tommo; Sam trying to control them. The classroom fades as the shouts of the students turn into a nursery rhyme. They change clothes, taking off blazers, turning jumpers inside out, etc. Adam becomes Young Teddy; Shayne becomes Young John; the rest become Kids. Sam watches, before disappearing. . .

Broadstairs, 1920s.

Kids (singing)

The farmer wants a wife, the farmer wants a wife,

Heigh-ho, Benjioh, the farmer wants a wife.

The Kid playing the farmer picks a wife.

The wife wants a child, the wife wants a child,

Heigh-ho, Benjioh, the wife wants a child.

The Kid playing the wife picks a child.

The child wants a dog, the child wants a dog,

Heigh-ho, Benjioh, the child wants a dog.

The Kid playing the child picks a dog.

The dog wants a bone, the dog wants a bone,

Heigh-ho, Benjioh, the dog wants a bone.

The Kid playing the dog picks Young Teddy, and everyone starts patting him.

We all pat the bone, we all pat the bone,

Heigh-ho, Benjioh, we all pat the bone!

The Kids pat Young Teddy to the ground until he struggles free.

Young Teddy Ouch! Get off! John, tell them.

Kid Look, over there!

Kid An empty dinghy!

Kid It must have floated away!

Young John Come on, then, let’s grab it.

Kid Let’s sail to France!

Kids Yeah!

The Kids exit, cheering Young Teddy follows but Young John pulls him back.

Young John Teddy, you’ve got to stay here.

Young Teddy What? Why?

Young John They’re my friends, and they don’t even like you, and you don’t even like them anyway. And you wouldn’t like the way we play, so . . .

Young Teddy Yes, I would – why wouldn’t I like it?

Young John ’Cause you get wet, and you hate getting wet, and you get dirty, and you hate getting dirty, and you have to be a boy or a girl that’s a bit like a boy, and you’re just a girl so . . . (Blows a raspberry.)

Mrs Heath (calling, off) Edward!

She enters.

What are you boys playing?

Young John Mum, can I go and get in a dinghy with my friends?

Mrs Heath Yes, of course, John. Run along.

Young Teddy Can I, Mother?

Mrs Heath Teddy, why would you want to go and do a thing like that?

Young John See.

He runs off, scruffy and dirty, as Young Teddy gets fixed by Mrs Heath, clothes straightened, face wiped, etc.

Mrs Heath Now, Teddy, you know you’ve your lesson with Miss Locke. Don’t you want to learn?

Young Teddy I know, Mother. I do want to learn, honestly.

Young Kay returns to fetch a hat. She looks at Young Teddy giggles, and exits.

Mrs Heath One of your friends, hmm?

Young Teddy No, I don’t. . . I don’t even know her name.

Mrs Heath It’s Kay, Teddy. You know that. (Sighs, wipes him down.) You’re ever such a bright boy, Teddy. Such a bright little boy. I’d hate you to get. . . distracted with . . .

Young Teddy I won’t, Mother. I promise.

Mrs Heath (looks at him; smiles; stands.) Good.

Miss Locke appears by the piano. Mrs Heath holds Young Teddy’s hand.

Mrs Heath Busy morning on the stall, Miss Locke?

Miss Locke Yes, Mrs Heath, very busy.

Mrs Heath What have they been going for today, I wonder?

Miss Locke Geraniums today, Mrs Heath. We’ve had a run on them.

Mrs Heath Geraniums? Isn’t it funny? From one day to the next. Geraniums, you say?

Miss Locke Hot cakes, Mrs Heath. Like hot cakes, I swear.

Mrs Heath Well there you are. Geraniums, Teddy.

Miss Locke Hello, Teddy.

Mrs Heath Say hello to Miss Locke, Teddy. He’s been ever so keen to get started.

Miss Locke I hope so.

Mrs Heath Haven’t you?

Young Teddy Yes.

Mrs Heath Ever so keen.

Miss Locke Are you, Teddy?

Young Teddy Yes.

Mrs Heath Yes, ever so keen. (Beat.) Jolly good, well I’ll be through here.

She exits. Silence. Miss Locke wanders around, occasionally turning to look at Young Teddy and smile, until eventually just stopping and smiling at him.

Miss Locke Such a terribly serious boy, Teddy. You’ve always struck me as being a terribly, terribly serious boy. Don’t you ever have any fun? (Pause.) Why don’t you ever smile. Teddy; don’t you ever smile?

Young Teddy smiles.

Miss Locke That isn’t a smile, Teddy; that’s a terrible smile.

Young Teddy frowns.

Miss Locke And that’s a frown; what you’re doing now, Teddy. That isn’t a smile. (Gasps.) Look at that, that’s one of the biggest frowns I think I’ve ever seen. You know, if you turned that frown the other way around, it would be the biggest smile I’ve ever seen. Don’t you want to turn it upside down, Teddy. Like this.

She turns around and bends over, one hand on the floor, lifting her dress with the other and looking at Young Teddy through her legs.

Miss Locke As though you were about to stand on your head, Teddy. Turn upside down like this.

Young Teddy suspiciously turns round and bends over, looking at her through his legs.

Miss Locke There you go. That frown’s a smile now, Teddy. You’ve got a lovely smile.

They stay like this for some time. Miss Locke stands.

Miss Locke Well, I hope you’re serious about learning to play the piano, Teddy, because quite honestly I haven’t the time to ruddy waste, do you understand?

Young Teddy nods.

Miss Locke Well let’s get started then.

Miss Locke goes and sits at the piano. Pats the seat. Young Teddy joins her.

Miss Locke Now. I’m going to teach you scales and I’m going to show you arpeggios and I want you to practise them every day. And I’ll know, you know. I’ll be able to tell if you haven’t practised every single day. OK?

Young Teddy nods.

Miss Locke Very good, Teddy. Very good.

Miss Locke plays. Sam appears, away from this, sitting cross-legged, reading a book. He turns the page as Miss Locke fades and Young Kay appears, playing hospital. She has a stethoscope. Young Teddy joins her on the floor.

Young Kay Come on, Teddy. I need to check your heart beat. (Lifting his shirt.)

Young Teddy (yelping) Kay! It’s cold.

Young Kay Look. Do you want to die? Because you will if I don’t give you a check-up.

Young Teddy No.

Young Kay (packing away) Fine. Go out and play with your friends then.

Young Teddy You’re my friend.

Young Kay What?

Young Teddy (beat; shrugs) You know. (You’re my . . .)

Young Kay smiles, and puts the stethoscope on his chest again. They burst into giggly hysterics, clambering over each other in a play fight. They stop, Young Kay on top of Young Teddy.

Young Kay One day, we’re going to get married, you know.

Young Teddy (scrambling free) Urgh, I don’t think so.

Young Kay Our mothers think so. I just heard them talking in the kitchen. You have to ask me, though. The boy always asks the girl.

Young Teddy (putting on the nurse’s hat) Why?

Young Kay I don’t know but that’s just the way it is. I have to wait. And you have to ask.

Young Teddy (beat; as a female nurse.) ‘Now young lady. I am your nurse, Tedweena. And I need to check your heart beat. So lie down for me, there’s a good girl.’

Young Kay lies down as Young Teddy tickles her with the stethoscope on her stomach, as they laugh and fight some more. Sam closes his book and steps into his office.



Houses of Parliament.

Evening. Sam is by the entrance facing James, as though he’s just got back.

Sam I’m sorry, who did?

James I’m sorry?

Sam Who let you in?

James She did. Uh, the girl. She said just wait in here.

Sam (beat; goes to his desk, dumping his things.) Sorry, I . . . sorry, I just wasn’t – I thought we said we’d meet downstairs.

James Did we? Oh. Everything all right, though?

Sam Uh-uh. Yep. Sorry. Busy day. (Busying himself.) How, how’s everything over at, uh . . . at Labour HQ?

James Oh, you know. Same same. How about you? Still mangling up our Schools Bill? Ha.

Sam No, it was pretty mangled when we got it from you lot actually.

James Not my lot, I’ve nothing to do with it. / And I was only joking.

Sam No, you know, but. . . you know. Your side.

James Right. (Pause.) Still got stuff to do?

Sam Uh, I’ve, I’m in the, uh . . . the press office tonight, so . . .

James You’re . . . ? Sorry, you’re . . . working tonight?

Sam Later. Yes.

James Oh. Oh. Sorry, are . . . are we not . . . ? Going out?

Sam Uh, yeah. If you . . . for like a . . . drink.

James But . . . (Looks at his watch. Beat.) Right. So one drink.

Sam Yes.

James Oh.

Sam Is that . . . ?

James I just . . . I suppose because it was tonight, I had it in my head we were off to the, you know, the drinks. And then . . .

Sam Oh. No, I . . . no, I never really . . . do all that.

James No, I don’t see you around, actually. You’re not someone who I see around.

Sam smiles, politely. Continues busily.

James Are you . . . ? Yeah, someone was saying, you’ve got some . . . (laughs) um, little project on or something? Using schoolchildren as witnesses to the Bill. That’s . . . was that yours? Great gimmick, if it was. Well done.

Sam Asking schoolchildren what schoolchildren want for their schools is a gimmick?

James Well. Yeah. (Beat. Takes out a note.) I’m sorry, you did give me your number didn’t you? That was you? ‘Call me, 0-2-0 . . . ’ et cetera, et cetera.

Sam (stops looks at him; beat) Um. Do you . . . actually, sorry, do you know what . . .

James No, that’s fine.

Sam I’m just not . . . now is a bad time, sorry. I’m . . . not ready . . .

James Well. Maybe let’s try next week. Uh?

Sam Yeah, sure, Give, give . . . drop me a . . .

James (leaving the note on the desk opposite and nodding) Cool.



Broadstairs, 1930s.

Teenage Teddy appears at the piano with Miss Locke, playing together.

Miss Locke Very good, Teddy. I’m ever so proud, you know. Would you like me to continue coming round? Now that you’re ‘proficient’?

Pause. Teenage Teddy shrugs.

Miss Locke Only I’ve plenty other things that need doing. If you don’t need me any more. (Pause.) I’ve a boyfriend now, you know. He’s ever such a dish. Do you have a girlfriend, Teddy? (Pause.) What about that Kay girl, hmm? I won’t tell your mother, I swear it. Cross my heart and hope to die. (Pause.) You know, you really shouldn’t spend so much time with your mother. (Pause.) Teddy?

She leans in and kisses him on the cheek. He doesn’t move.

What do you make of that, hmm? How did that make you feel?

Pause. Teenage Teddy shrugs.

Miss Locke Very well, Teddy. (Stands.) Very well. (Exits.)



House of Commons Library.

Douglas at work. Sam enters.

Douglas Ah, morning morning. (Indicating a pile.) Here we are, ready and waiting.

Sam Uh. Thanks. Actually, I was wondering if I could . . . (handing over a list) if you could maybe dredge up anything in addition to . . . your ‘present’. Yesterday.

Douglas Um. Okey-cokey. But, uh . . . (looking at the list), you won’t find anything, you know . . . ‘revelatory’. If there was something, it would be out by now. Believe me.

Sam Well, I don’t even know what I’m looking for, so . . . I know there’ll be no, uh, ‘lines’ written down, but I at least want to see the lines that are, so that I may . . . read in between them. If you see my . . . (point).

Douglas Of course. (Makes to leave. Stops.) I did meet him once, you know? I was here on work experience, years ago. He was the Father of the House, then. Longest-serving MP My granddad used to say that the Fathers haunt this place. Here for so long in life they can’t leave it. Even in death.

Sam (smiles politely; gestures to the note) See what you can do.

Kay and Teddy appear, dancing a waltz in a light, the music distorted and ephemeral. They disappear.

Sam watches from the side. He leaves, as the music dies. . .

Broadstairs, 1940s.

Kay and Teddy walking home.

Kay I love dances. You should have worn your uniform. These military types can be so dapper and smart, I think. (Beat.) What was it like?

Teddy What was what like?

Kay The war. Being away. Fighting.

Teddy Well. Can’t say I really . . . you know, unlike some, really . . . fought. But . . .

Kay skips forward a little, walking back to face him.

Kay You really are quite a good dancer, you know.

Teddy Oh. Not really. I was just following you, Kay.

Kay takes his hands and leads him forward as they twirl round together. Ted makes a show of resisting, before relenting. And laughing they carry on walking.

Kay Back to London for you, then, tomorrow? Any word on vacant seats?

Teddy No, not yet. It’s simply a matter of waiting. Job keeps me busy. You? How’s the school?

Kay Oh, fine. You know. Boys will be boys.

Teddy (stopping) Well, here we are, then. (Beat.) This is where we part.

Kay Sorry?

Teddy (indicating) This your road, isn’t it?

Kay Well. Yes, but –

Teddy Ten minutes, you should be fine. I’m this way.

Kay Uh. Yes, all. . . Gosh, looks very muddy. Might even have to . . . (takes off one of her shoes) get rid of these. Don’t want to twist an ankle.

Teddy Okey-dokey

Kay (beat; nods to herself, taking off the other heel. Beat) You know, you’re . . . don’t – you’re more than welcome to . . . see me all the way to my door, if you’d like.

Teddy No, that’s all right, thank you. My mother will probably be waiting up, anyway.

Kay Right. Well. (Waits expectantly. Small sigh. Kisses him on the cheek.) Goodbye, Ted.

Teddy Cheerio.

Kay hobbles off one way, and Teddy strolls off the other. . .



Sam’s office.

Late. Sam is looking through books, lit by lamps. Nicholas enters, slumping down at the desk opposite, exclaiming dramatically.

Nicholas Why can’t I escape?!

Sam How’d it go?

Nicholas Well. If they did offer me a job I wouldn’t take it because I couldn’t work for a company so stupid they’d employ me based on that interview. (Buries his head.) Oh God. (Looks at his watch.) Seven p.m., Sam. Why you still here? What you reading?

Sam (closing the book) Nothing.

Nicholas Oh-oh . . . (Off Sam’s look.) Oh Sam. Sam-Sam. Why are you still here?

Sam I’m just finishing up, I’ll go / in a sec.

Nicholas No, why are you here? I know why I’m here. I can’t get a job combing old people’s hair. But you. Michael has said he will recommend you for anything. I’ll . . . recommend you. (With letters from Sam’s desk.) Look. Just sat here. His reference. My reference. You could climb three, four rungs up the ladder. All you have to say is where. So Why Are You Still Here?

Sam I’m not . . . I don’t – I’m not sure that this is the ladder I want to climb. The . . . this behind-the-scenes stuff, I think I actually . . . I don’t, that I actually might . . .

Nicholas (laughs) Oh my God, I knew it. (Indicating the adjoining office door.) You want to be one of them, don’t you?

Sam I . . . (Shrugs) I, I don’t . . . I’m not . . .

Nicholas Hey, no, listen. It’s not like it wasn’t obvious, even if it wasn’t to you. All this . . . benevolent extra-curricular stuff, like with the kids and shit. You’re just, you’re one of those that . . . you know. Want to. Make things better. I personally couldn’t give a blind man’s fuck and that’s why I’m getting out. (Beat.) Sam. A ‘politician’. (Smiles.) Ah, which now makes sense about the gay thing. I like your thinking.

Sam What thing, what thinking?

Nicholas You know. Keeping it on the down low. No parties, no . . . you know, no really ‘gay’ stuff.

Sam I’m . . . I don’t know what you mean. Sorry.

Nicholas Well, you know. Yes, you do. Around here. On this ladder, it makes no difference. Does it? Diversity? Uh, ‘yes’. But on that other ladder. Politics in public. Out there. (Indicates window and ‘real’ world.) You know? It’s different. You can’t . . . ‘flaunt it’.

Sam Flaunt it?

Nicholas OK. I see you’re getting . . . I was, I’m just trying to help. I’ve been in this party longer, I know what it’s like.

Sam OK, I’m – Then tell me, I’m listening.

Nicholas No, you’re being passive-aggressive, that’s not the / same as listening.

Sam OK, I’m sorry –

Nicholas And now you’re interrupting. (Pause.) Look. Just . . . yes, of course, we have gay MPs. Humphreys. Married. Yey. But they . . . they kind of have to wait till they’re near the top before they ‘announce’. Just let your work do the talking, and if you shine, you can be whatever you want. You like men, women, old people, goats, hey. As long as . . . I’m saying they don’t . . . You know, they’re not ‘really’ gay.

Sam They’re not – what? They’re not –

Nicholas They covered their tracks, is all. There are no seedy stories, no pictures.

Sam Why would there be seedy stories / just because they’re –

Nicholas You might think the country has changed, but it hasn’t all that. And you might think the party’s changed but you know that isn’t true either. We’re different, the new intake are different. The young ’uns. And the front bench is different. Hurrah. But behind them in the House and filling the hall of the conference are party members as rooted in the Right as they have ever been. And they will have a black, Islamic wheelchair-bound liberal as Prime Minister before we see a fella kissing his other half on the steps of Number 10. And you know I’m right. (Pause.) Christ, I’m just saying if you want to climb that ladder, don’t make it an issue.

Sam I didn’t! You did! What are you actually telling me to do, be less gay?

Nicholas Is that what I said? / Is that what I said?!

Sam I’ve no fucking clue what you’re saying to be honest, Nicholas!

Nicholas Don’t you speak to me like that, I am still your fucking chief of staff! (Pause.) All right? Jesus H. I’m saying keep on doing what you’re doing, for Christ’s sake! (Pause.) Well, now I’m in an even worse mood, thanks very fucking much.

Sam (bangs the desk; pause.) I literally . . . I can’t believe it’s still . . .

Nicholas (pause) Look, I didn’t . . . Things, they came out wrong, please don’t . . . I’m – Don’t make this a . . . a thing. (Pause.) Sam? We cool?

Sam nods his head.

Nicholas turns his desk lamp off – and that half of the room descends into darkness. He exits. Sam reads at his desk, lit by a lamp. His phone rings.

Sam (answers) Yes?

Ted, on the phone, flicks on a lamp at the desk opposite, holding James’s note.

Ted Hello?

Sam Hello. Who’s that?

Ted (looking at the note) Have I got the wrong number?

Sam slams the phone down and stares at it. He turns his light off and disappears.



Ted’s office, House of Commons, 1950s.

Ted looks at his note, confused. He hangs up and begins to re-dial

Timothy and Frank enter, slovenly and yawning, with cups of tea.

Ted puts the phone down.

Ted Morning, gentlemen.

Frank Well, that’s the understatement of the year, Mr Heath.

Ted Lots to do, lots to do.

Timothy You know, I never knew there was a six o’clock in the morning, Frank.

Frank No?

Timothy No. I knew there was one in the evening, I’ve seen it. Every day. Bang on at six o’clock. But I did not know until today that there was another one. In the morning.

Ted (handing out lists) Frank. Tim.

Timothy We were out late at that Kensington fund-raiser, Mr Heath.

Ted Your government needs you, gentlemen, time to set to work, all right?

Frank We were working last night, Mr Heath.

Ted You were drinking last night.

Timothy You can drink and work at the same time, that’s what fund-raisers are, drinking and working, working and drinking. My God, I think I could sleep standing up. I do, I really do –

Frank (reading) A three-line whip for a Transport and Denationalisation Bill. Makes me want to cry.

Timothy The Chief could have mentioned it last night when we were necking our gins.

Ted He didn’t know himself then, this comes straight from the top.

Frank Oh, well, thank you very much, Mr Churchill –

Ted Look. (Serious.) We are hanging on by a thread, do you understand? We are literally under attack in there every single day. It’s a barrage. And whether or not it’s a Bill to regulate the size of grass or a Bill to invade Canada, the Opposition will divide the other way every single time. All it takes is a handful of our chaps to get a cold, sprain their ankle, or miss the bus, and we couldn’t pass the parcel, let alone a law. So be good chaps and get to it. (Dialling.)

Timothy Five past six on a Monday morning. They’re gonna be angry.

Ted They are going to be loyal! Gentlemen. (Gesturing to their phones.) If you please.

(On his phone.) Ah. Mrs Turnbull. Joint Deputy Whip, sorry to bother you so early in the morning. Could I just have a small word with your husband please?

He’s where?

The House of Commons? (Winces at Timothy and Frank.) No, no. I’m sure you’re right. We obviously just keep missing him. Apologies again.

He puts the phone down and stares at Timothy and Frank with a ‘whoops’ look.

Ted Uh, Tim, pull the card on Turnbull, would you? Stockton-on-Tees.

Tim opens a drawer. Inside is a vast system of index cards. He flicks through them, until he finds the one he needs.

Tim Stockton. Got it.

Ted Write on it: ‘Marital problems’ stop. Brackets ‘adultery’, question mark.

Frank Well. When we bump into old tearaway Turnbull later I’m sure we won’t have to worry which way he’ll be voting, now will we?

Ted The information we record is not for the purposes of blackmail, Frank, it is to foresee the potential for scandal and to nip it in the bud before it blossoms. Make sure we get him in this afternoon, will you? (Small beat.) And incidentally, yes, make sure he does understand that he’ll be voting with us.

Frank salutes. Ted leaves with an empty cup in search of tea. Frank whacks Tim with his list, Tim whacks Frank with his, as they slowly begin to work.

Tim Watch it.

Frank You watch it. How’s your head?

Tim Like an elephant is sat on it. (Looking at the cards.) God, look at this. A litany of misadventures and sins. Very proud of this system, he is. I don’t care what he says, he loves the gossip. (Reading.) Adultery. Alcoholism. Sodomy. If it’s wrong I can guarantee you that somewhere there is a Tory doing it. Aw. Look at this. ‘Edward Heath, Bexley’. Completely blank. That makes me sad.

Frank (dialling) I’m quite proud of the few black marks against my name, Tim.

Tim As am I, Frankie boy. As am I.

Frank Sign of a life lived, I always think.

Tim I entirely agree with you, Frank. I do entirely agree. But not our Teddy here.

Ted returns as Frank speaks on the phone, Ted and Tim continuing over.

Frank (on the phone) Morning, Mr Whitehouse? / How do you do, sir, Frank in the Whips’ Office. Just sounding our boys out regarding the Transport Bill for this evening. Patrick’s adamant it’s a full house for this one. (Pause.) Right. . . (Continuing.)

Tim Did you have a nice weekend, then, Mr Heath? Get up to any fun?

Ted Oh. You know. You?

Tim Oh yes, thank you very much, yes indeed, sir. Met a lovely young thing out in Southfields. A dance that my brother helped organise. Lovely she was. You?

Ted Oh. The usual.

Tim And what’s that then?

Ted Sorry?

Tim What’s the usual, Mr Heath?

Ted You know. Quiet weekend.

Tim Go out anywhere? Meet anyone? Do anything?

Ted Are you making your way through that list all right, Timothy? Time is ticking.

Frank (putting the phone down) I am. Aldershot confirmed. (Picking up the phone.) Right, Altrincham.

Tim I was just asking Mr Heath what he got up to over the weekend, Frank.

Frank Oh, and what did he get up to, Tim, anything?

Tim I’m just trying to find that out, Frank. Mr Heath? Anything?

Ted whips a baton out of his pocket, spins round, and begins. Music.

Tim and Frank freeze. As Ted waves his baton, almost like a magic wand, Tim and Frank follow, reversing out of the office, as it begins to fade into the music classroom.



Music classroom.

Ray, Tommo, Michelle, Adam, Muznah, Shayne and Heather are sitting in a semicircle with notes and papers. Sam is pacing, distracted. . .

Michelle So as Education Secretary, right, it is my recommendation that we don’t change the school-leaving age to eighteen, based on the fact that school and academics and all that, yeah, is not for every pupil, and it would be better for those for which it ain’t to go out and get jobs and start earning. (Beat.) Sir?

Sam Uh, sorry. Right. Yes. OK. Um. So you plan to basically keep things as they are?

Michelle Ba-sic-a-lly. yeah . . .

Sam Thoughts, Prime Minister?

Adam I agree. I think we’re old enough to make our own choices.

Sam But what about skills? That means these guys and girls are leaving untrained.

Michelle Train on the job, though. Won’t learn to build a building in the classroom.

Sam What about crime. Home Secretary?

Tommo (pause) Is that me?

Ray laughs.

Sam Surely keeping kids busy in school or on apprenticeships gives them aspirations, gives them hope. Education plays a very important social role.

Shayne We aren’t all criminals, sir.

Michelle Well, just give ’em more stuff to do, yeah. Youth centres and stuff.

Tommo And more police. Kick ’em in line, innit.

Sam So you’re going to spend money on police for when they are criminals rather than in education before they get the chance? OK. Gonna need to raise taxes, Chancellor.

Shayne Fine, I’ll raise taxes.

Adam No. We’re not.

Shayne Fuck off, it’s my call.

Adam Sir, is the Chancellor really allowed to tell the Prime Minister to fuck off?

Sam No. Well. The last one used to, but anyway. If you want to raise taxes (sucking in air), that means families are going to struggle more, perhaps leading to an increase in crime.

When you’ve just invested all this money in extra police. How can that be?

Shayne (sighs) I don’t know, sir.

The school bell. They stand and begin to pack away, get ready to leave.

Sam Well. It’s something to think about for next time.

Heather Well, why don’t you just tell us the right answer, sir?

Sam There is no necessarily ‘right’ answer, that’s the point.

Muznah He’d raise taxes. My dad says all they’re ever after is our money.

Sam Not at all. We believe in low taxes. In fact one of the traditional divides between Labour and Tory –

He indicates two separate groups that have formed as the students pack away.

– Left and Right, socialism and capitalism or whatever, is just that.

Ray (running over to the other, ‘Tory’ group) Fuck, I’m voting Conservative then.

Sam Well, it just depends where you stand. Both arguments are good ones.

Muznah How can high taxes ever be good? It ain’t fair, man.

Sam Well, Labour traditionally seek higher taxes because they believe in higher spending, and that if we all chuck into the pot, then we all benefit. Problem is that means the tax burden on families is high. Conservatives believe if taxes are lower, the individual – men, women and families – are able to succeed on their own terms, and if you let individuals strive and achieve, they move everyone forward with them, with a strong economy and big growth, et cetera. Tories believe in less interference, Labour in managing more, yet spending more. So it’s difficult. It is. I’ve grappled with it. This country has always grappled with it, flipping from one side to the other. In the seventies, more Left, collective responsibility; in the eighties, more Right, the individuals. And that’s what you need to decide. Your party, your government. Which way. Welcome to power.

Michelle Sir? What if you don’t believe your party has chosen the right way on something, do you still have to vote with them and stuff?

Sam It’s expected you will, yes. There’s something called a Whips’ Office to check you do.

Michelle But you just said you believed in individual choice. How is that fair?

Sam (beat) I don’t know.

Shayne Bye, sir!

Ray ‘Bye sir’! Gay. (Feeling Adam’s arse.)

Adam Oy! The fuck you doing?! Why / you always doing that?

Sam Hey! OK, everyone else, off you go. Ray. Wait here.

Ray What? Fucking hell.

The others leave. Sam is packing away his things.

Sam What’s your issue with Adam? Why do you go around calling him gay? Everyone gay?

Ray Cos it’s funny?

Sam Well, when you get a little older you’ll realise sexual preference, just like race, isn’t something you should be insulted with.

Ray I know that, yeah, it’s just . . . when you say ‘gay’ you ain’t saying, like ‘gay’ gay, you’re just saying, like . . . ‘Uh, that’s gay’. As in. A bit shit.

Sam Some of the people you call gay might actually be gay and you’re not helping them.

Ray Yeah, I’m encouraging them to come out, innit. Why you so bothered? Are you gay, sir? (Pause.) Are you? (Pause. Smiles.) I won’t tell anyone.

Sam I’ll see you next week, Ray.



Sam’s office.

Evening. Sam is at his desk. James stands facing him.

Sam I’m sorry.

James I’ve been down there twenty minutes.

Sam Time just slipped / away from me, I –

James Like I was down there twenty minutes on Monday. Getting a bit silly, now, isn’t it?

Sam I know, I’m not . . . it isn’t / that I –

James You do know people, don’t you? You have interacted with people before? Socially? You’ve not been . . . I don’t know, in a cave somewhere for twenty years? You’ve had, do have, friends? Relationships? Boyfriends? You are gay, aren’t you, Sam?

Sam I’ve just been very . . . I’m not – and someone . . . said / something to me that –

James Only I know a lot of gay people, in here, and outside, and what I see in them is pride and acceptance, I don’t see that in you. I see awkwardness and I see shame.

Sam And what have I got to be ashamed about?

James (rolling himself a fag with tobacco and a Rizla) You tell me.

Sam You can’t smoke that in here.

James I know. I’m just / getting it ready.

Sam Don’t want to break the law now, do you? Your law?

James Not my / law.

Sam Ah, the great party of the working class, my God.

James What are you doing? What’s this now? Are we arguing? Having a / political –?

Sam The needs and aspirations of the everyday man.

James Well, you know. It’s the closest thing we’ve got. Just like yours is the closest thing the wealthy and elite have got. We all have to make do. (Resisting the temptation to bite back. Beat while rolling.) You are an enigma, Sam. Your family are working class, aren’t they?

Sam Just because they’re northern doesn’t mean they’re working class.

James Absolutely, no, of course. But your home town, its background. Manufacture, industry, all that. Industries and communities that your lot destroyed when last in power; what do your family and / neighbours think about your choice of –

Sam No, I agree, my home town is no longer full of factories and mines and quarries and mills, it is now full of business parks, and retailers, and offices –

James Well, gain a business park, lose a community. It’s all about balance.

Sam Ah, yes, those mythical communities you like to pretend existed. Where nobody locked their doors and everyone knew their neighbours –

James No, they did exist. (They did.) Still do. Despite the best efforts of you and yours. Is it a coincidence, I often wonder, that in the Labour heartlands, people still say hello to one another in the street /, are polite, when in the . . . richer, Tory south, they hide in gated communities with alarm systems and never –

Sam Wow, and the award for Generalisation of the Year goes to? Yes, all those things we took away, working in dangerous industries, and replaced them with, what, good nine-to-five jobs, and two cars on the drive, and holidays abroad / and a Sky digibox –

James Ah yes. Money. ‘The most important thing’. (Smiles. Pause.) Shall I try again? In a few days? Just to see ‘where you’re at’? One last time?

Sam shrugs. James shrugs back. Pause. He approaches Sam, who moves back away from him, until his back hits the adjoining office door. James is close. . .

James What are you so scared of, Sam? I’m not scary. What is it . . . ?

He moves in for a kiss. Sam. pushes past him and leaves.

Sam Wait, sorry I . . . just need a . . . glass of . . . (Exits.)

James sighs. Pause. The door to the adjoining office opens, as Nicholas pops his head round to check the coast is clear. Seeing nothing, he opens the door fully out, hiding James behind it. He enters, closing the door to reveal him.

Nicholas Oh. Hi.

James Hi. You’re . . . ?

Nicholas Nicholas. You’re . . . in my office.

James You’ve been next door? In there?

Nicholas Working late. You know.

Sam comes back in.

Sam So, listen, uh . . . let’s – (Sees Nicholas.) Hi.

Nicholas Hello, Sam.

Sam This is James. He works over at, um . . . have you – You’re popping in or . . . ?

James No, he was –

Nicholas Yes. Yes, I’ve just popped in now. Just arrived.

James Well, I was just heading off. So. (Pause.) Bye.

He exits. Silence.

Sam I’ll be heading off as well then, Nick. See you tomorrow. (Exiting)

Nicholas Bye-bye now.

Ted appears at the piano, playing. Mrs Heath is in a chair, a blanket over her, eyes closed. Sam watches. . .

Ted looks at his mother and stops playing. Long pause. He reaches his hand over and touches hers. He flinches back. She doesn’t move. He reaches out and touches her again, holding her wrist. Nothing. Ted turns back to the piano. Beat. He plays.



Sam’s office.

Nicholas is on the phone as Sam enters, a bit annoyed. Nicholas is in the office. He dumps his things on his desk and sits, working instantly.

Nicholas Very well, thank you, very well indeed. I got a message to call back.

Really? Well that’s . . . Oh my God, wow. I’m . . . I’m delighted, thank you so much, I don’t know what to say. Huh . . .

Will do, no problem. OK. Thank you. Talk to you soon. Bye.

He puts the phone down and leaps up, punches the air.

Whoow! Yeah! Get in! Come on! You will never guess what, Sammy-boy, I have been put on the candidate list to be . . . (drum roll) bam bam bah! A Conservative councillor for Wandsworth. Courtesy of the local Putney Association. Booyakasha!

Sam You . . . When . . . ? You applied to be a councillor? Why didn’t you tell me?

Nicholas Well, case I didn’t get it.

Sam I thought that kind of thing didn’t . . . that you didn’t care / about. . .

Nicholas Yeah, well. You know, these councillors, great offers and shit, jobs, all that. What with their connections. Whoow! And, eh, as a fellow Wandsworth resident, I trust I have your vote.

Sits. Spins. Swivels. Laughs. Looks at Sam and sighs contentedly.

Nicholas Now. I know something that I know you don’t know that I know about you.

Sam What?

Nicholas You know the other night. In here. When you came in. And I was with that boy. I hadn’t just arrived. I’d been in Michael Two’s office. Working late. So I know he hadn’t just ‘swung by’. Do you see? (Pause.) Who does your boyfriend work for? He’s not one of ours.

Sam Well, now I’m confused. For, you see, I do not have a boyfriend, so I cannot tell you for whom he works, do you see?

Nicholas Hmm. (‘Do you see?’) Well, I knew you batted for the other side, Sam. I just didn’t know you were batting with the other team. If I find out that you’ve been sneaking signals over the top –

Sam How dare you . . . !

Nicholas (bangs the desk) Do not interrupt me and don’t presume to tell me / what I –

Sam (standing overlapping) I won’t stay to listen to this.

Nicholas – dare or dare not say. (Standing.) Oh yes you fucking will! Sit down.

Sam How dare you –

Nicholas There’s Those Words again. I / won’t tell anyone but –

Sam There’s no rules saying you can’t have . . . between – and / anyway I’m not fucking –

Nicholas But I will tell you this. You’re on a timer with me now, boyo. So I don’t want any fuss, any accusations about things you think I may or may not have said during our little chat the other day. I don’t want any threats; I basically just don’t want you around. We don’t like each other, Sam. Do we? If we’re honest? Or at least I don’t think you like me and I can’t stand people who don’t like me. You’ve got your references. Get a position somewhere else. And leave. Make it soon, make it quiet, but make it quick. (Pause.) Would you like me to go over anything?

Sam No . . .

Nicholas (smiles, rubbing his hair, over-friendly) Then get outta here. You big queen.

Long pause, Nicholas holding and smiling at Sam. Nina enters and they break.

Nicholas Nina, hey, guess what? Sam’s decided he’s moving on.

Nina Oh. Cool. So you’ve finally chosen where you wanna go?

Nicholas Catch you lovers later. (Exits.)

Nina (pause) You all right?

Sam nods, unconvincingly.

Nina You sure?

The phone rings. Sam answers. Ted appears, on the phone, holding the note.

Sam Hello?

Ted Hello? Who’s this?

Sam slams the phone down and pushes away from the desk. Ted disappears.

Sam Did you hear that?!

Nina What?

Sam That phone! Did it ring?

Nina Yes! Sam, what’s wrong? Are you OK?

Sam (sitting; pause; tries to laugh, unconvincingl; pause) Nina. What . . . what do people think of . . . Am I . . . ? Of me? What do . . . ?

Nina Right now, I’m not sure. (Smiles.) Kidding.

Sam No, but . . . Am I – Do people . . . ? Am I someone that it’s. Quite hard to like . . .

Nina Sam, of course not. No . . .

Sam (God.) Why these? Eh? This lot. This side of the fence. Why did you pick these?

Nina Blue brings out my eyes. (Smiles. Beat.) I dunno. I remember at uni, sharing a house. We’d have arguments about the washing up. I would just do mine. Another housemate would sometimes do other people’s. Her point being if everyone chipped in, it’s nicer. And fairer. I thought if everyone just did their own, it would always get done. I think that’s when I knew. Or started to.

Sam (pause; half-smile; nods; stands) I . . . I have to . . . get to class . . .

He saunters out.

Nina follows





Hampstead Heath, 1950s. A bright summer’s day.

Kay is sitting on one of two swings hanging from a tree. Ted stands. Watching her.

Kay You used to push me for hours at a time. Too high. I thought I’d go over the top.

Ted (smiles) Hello, Kay.

Kay Hello, Ted. It’s been a long time. I’m . . . awfully sorry about your mother.

Ted Thank you for your card.

Kay I meant to telephone but . . . life takes up so much time these days. Still, thanks for your call. I just adore Hampstead Heath in the summer. You come here often?

Ted Um. Now and again, yes.

Kay You must struggle to find the time. I hear you’re doing terribly well.

Ted They’re considering me as a replacement for Sir Henry as full Deputy Whip.

Kay Wow. Well, Teddy, that’s wonderful. You really are / on the rise –

Ted Only ‘considering’, though. They have . . . there are concerns.

Kay Concerns, surely not. What concerns?

Ted There are . . . rumours. (Not completely unsub –) Problem, uh . . . (Laughs, semi-tragically.) Problem is, the rumours are all I have. In a void that other people fill with . . . I don’t know what other people fill it with. ‘A private life’, I suppose. If the rumours disappear, there’s just a, a hole where . . .

Kay Ted, are you all right?

Ted I miss her. So much. I . . . have a, a . . . pain. . . here. And I need it to go. I need it to be . . . replaced. You wouldn’t . . . believe some of the things I’ve been . . . trying to –

Kay (stands) Oh Ted . . .

Ted stumbles back with his hands up, not wanting to be touched. Kay stops. He slumps down on the ground.

Kay Talk to me, Ted. Please. Why did you . . . Is there a reason you got back in touch?

Ted A reason? (A reason . . . ah yes.) And the orchestra cease playing, the hall goes quiet, and all assembled are awaiting my cadenza. If you’ll allow me a moment to prepare. (He shifts. Looks at the earth beneath him.) London clay, Hampstead Heath. Only really to be found in the south, you know. Tough stuff. Contains some pretty amazing fossils by all accounts, and crystals too, if one had only the inclination to dig. (Pause. Chuckles, tragically.) ‘Heath.’ Rambling. Desolate. Low-level plant life. Shrubbery and weeds. Can only grow so high, before its inferior nature causes it to be surpassed by those . . . stronger. A waste land. A waste space, waste of space, just . . . (Trails.) I always thought if I was ever going to marry, Kay, then it would be you. (Short pause.) If I ever was, that is. But alas . . . that boat has left the harbour. And I’m characteristically left standing alone on the dock.

Kay A girl can only wait so long. Teddy.

Ted (nods) How is Richard?

Kay He’s fine. Thank you. We’re both happy. And fine.

Ted I’m sorry, Kay. I don’t know what I was thinking.

Kay Do you remember that summer ball, Ted? I was going to kiss you that night. Only you never found out because you said goodbye and . . . Not out of . . . It was simply that . . . (Sighs.) Truth is, Ted, you’re not like other people. In that you don’t need Other People. Not the way other people do. (Beat.) We all make sacrifices. You just have to make sure they’re worth it.

Ted I still have that photograph. By my bed. To remember you.

Kay I think the fact that you need a photograph, Ted . . . I think, speaks volumes. (Smiles warmly.) Now stop sitting there all glum, and come play with me on the swings.

Beat. Ted saunters over to the empty swing and sits. They start to swing together.



Music classroom.

Shayne, Tommo, Heather and Muznah are dancing around to music from the CD player, while Adam, Ray and Michelle sit scribbling notes, Ray standing to contribute his own moves occasionally. Sam enters. Tommo presses ‘stop’.

Tommo Uh-oh. That’s detention for you, sir.

Sam Sorry, I’m . . . so sorry for being late, I got held up, and . . .

Michelle We’ve nearly finished our Green Paper, sir.

Tommo turns the music on again and dances, turning it off when Sam shouts.

Sam Cool. Uh, let me take a . . . (To Shayne.) Could you . . . turn that off, please?!

Tommo Why? We’ve done our paper, gotta get back into the music groove, you get me?

Michelle This is more important, Tommo. Cut it out.

Tommo Why, I ain’t never gonna be a proper politician like this guy, am I?

Sam I’m not a proper politician.

Michelle Don’t you wanna be though, sir?

Sam No, I . . . I don’t know what I . . . (Beat.) You know, at your age . . . Yours isn’t the only age where you’re going to find you have to make decisions about your life, your future.

Your future isn’t just something you decide upon when you’re young and then one day, bam, it starts. It, it’s something that is constantly . . . readdressed.

Shayne You mean you don’t know what you want to be when you grow up? (Laughs)

Sam (shrugs) No. I don’t.

The bell rings. The students begin to leave.

Sam OK. Uh . . . Listen, sorry I was / late, but I’m, I’m glad you got some work done.

Shayne Fucking hell, that was a long lesson. Thanks, sir.

Sam I’ll look over this and . . . and feedback as soon as . . .

The student all yell ‘Bye’ as they exit, except Michelle and Ray, who stay seated.

Michelle (with the ‘Paper’) Will it make any difference though, sir? Does anything ever?

Sam Yes, of . . . Everything . . . (Pause.) I know it feels like things don’t change or that, that politics doesn’t . . . (Pause.) No one ever wants to make things worse, politicians don’t want . . . We all just disagree on how. And amongst all the bad news that only ever gets . . . amongst the big stuff, there are a hundred little things that happen every . . . (Beat.) Like, £370 million set aside, for example, why? War? Speed cameras? No, to be spent giving carers who look after disabled relatives a day off. Six hundred thousand stair gates are to be bought and given to poor families in order to stop their children from falling down the stairs. You won’t hear that. And there’s no agenda there, it’s just. . . because it’s a Good Thing To Do. I know that there is shit, my God. Terrible, inexcusable things that have to be sorted out, that are wrong. But I have to believe that every day, in little ways . . . I have to believe that things can get better. That tomorrow will be better than today.

Michelle Maybe you should become Prime Minister, sir. (Beat.) Maybe I should . . .

Sam (smiles) You would be an excellent Prime Minister, Michelle.

Michelle smiles. And exits. Sam. paces, fraught, seemingly forgetting Ray.

Ray Can I ask you sumfin? Do you hide that you’re gay ’cause you’re in politics and that?

Sam I never said I was gay.

Ray You never said you weren’t.

Sam Well. Um . . . in certain quarters of life, erm . . . tolerance advances slower. Not long ago, teachers couldn’t be gay. I’m sure there’s perhaps stigma still in, in industry, manufacture. The military, in . . .

Ray And, like, some families, and that. My family, they’re like, Jamaican, and well religious, into traditions and all that. My mum would go skitz, bruv. If you get me.

He reaches out and rests his hand on Sam’s. Sam looks at it.

Ray So. Like. Despite what I do. And say. I’m basically asking if you is all right. I’m asking if you’re OK. Because what I’m saying is I Get You. Yeah?

Sam begins to tremble, breaking down as he stares at Ray’s hand, overcome. Ray puts his hand on Sam’s face. Sam closes his eyes. Lost. He stands –

Sam (exiting) Um. Thank – thank you for your work today, Ray. I’m sorry I was late.

Ray You weren’t late, man. Far as I’m concerned, you came right on time.

Sam’s office. Sam and James,

James Well?

Pause. Sam shakes his head. Struggling. . .

James OK. I won’t bother you again. I’m sorry things aren’t easier for you.

Sam And why do you find everything so pissing easy?! (Fuck.) I mean us lot, first Lady Prime Minister, shit, maybe even the first gay Prime Minister, / who knows, so –

James I’m sure you’re right about absolutely everything, but I’m leaving, Sam, I’m –

Sam And your guy didn’t even vote to repeal Section 28, / he didn’t –

James We didn’t make the law; don’t take credit for repealing a law that you made. Your guy didn’t / vote to repeal it.

Sam Our guy voted for the equal age of consent, civil partnerships. When not under a three-line whip he’s consistently / voted for equal rights, whereas dear Prime Minister, your leader –

James Civil partnerships would not have happened under any government except Labour and you know that’s true. / I’ll stand back and let you criticise us on anything –

Sam He didn’t vote for any of those things, any of them! / Missed all those votes. Why?

James You can criticise our record on anything, but the one thing, the one thing you cannot criticise us on is this!

Sam We had Torch, we have LGBTory / senior gay party members, cabinet ministers –

James What are you doing? What are you hiding behind this – Exactly, Sam, exactly! So who the fuck is stopping you from being happy? Hmm?

The phone rings. Sam and James stare at each other.

James You should answer that. I’ll see you, Sam.

James exits. Beat. Sam answers the phone. A light on the opposite desk flickers on to reveal Ted, on the phone. They both sound exhausted.

Sam Hello?

Ted Hello?

Sam (beat, smiles tragically, shakes his head) Hello.

Ted (looking at his note) My apologies, I’ve been requested to get in touch. Uh . . .

Sam Where are you, I’ve . . . I’ve been trying to find you but I can’t, I can’t . . . find you, I. . .

Ted Well. I’m just . . . I’m here. (Pause.) Is there something I can help you with, or . . . ?

Sam I mean, you’re, you’re very hard to, to . . . pin – to . . . I mean I’m not even sure what I’m . . . What are you – what were you looking for?

Ted Uh. I don’t think I under – (Beat.) Well, there was just an, an emptiness. That appeared. A few, a couple of . . . and I suppose I thought the right, the best, thing to do was try and fill it. With something. But we all have holes. Just a case of –

Sam Can I ask you . . . what made you choose? When you first began. Why these?

Ted Um. In truth, I don’t think you pick it. I think it picks you –

Sam Because I can see, I can see its potential for the . . . for it to work, and I, I wanna be a part of that. I want to make it work. But sometimes . . . sometimes. Just when you think they’ve moved on . . . when they’re on the verge of being . . .

Ted Well. A friend of mine. Quite the orator. He once said . . . that we have defended ourselves against our enemies. But who will save us from ourselves? So. Why don’t you tell me? What made you ‘pick a side’?

Sam Um. I suppose . . . (Sighs.) I just remember, even as a, as a young . . . man, not even man, just a boy . . . I remember even as a boy feeling so different, and strange, and alone and I suppose . . . that when nothing makes sense to you, and you’re not sure who you are . . . the idea of – the strength of the person that stands alone, carves their own path, doesn’t have to rely on any group or any community or anyone – of it not being who you are or where you’re from but what you do, it was . . . I suppose it was like a language I could finally speak.

Ted (nods) Well. Of all the things you should take from this lot, then, I think you should hold on to that. If nothing else makes sense, if everything else just seems like a mess . . . ‘it’s not who you are, it’s what you do’. You should hold on to that.

Sam (pause) Thank you. (Beat.) I’m sorry, I have to – I have another call to make. I –

Ted Yes. Of course. Well. (Smiles.) Lots to do, lots to do. Goodbye.

They both put the phone down and disappear. Sam. picks up his phone and dials.

Sam Hi, it’s Sam, Michael Daikin’s office, a guy called James is about to pass through the lobby, tall, blond hair, could you . . . could you ask him to wait there for just a second? And I’ll be right down. Tell him I promise.



Sam’s office.

Sam stands facing Nicholas, alone moments before Nina enters.

Sam Can I have a word? Please?

Nicholas Of course you can, Sam-u-el. Any time.

Nina (entering) Morning, Nick. I’ve got two / messages for you.

Sam A proper word. A formal one. It’s about the little chat we had.

Nicholas Yes, of course. Can I just have one minute with Nina, first, and then I’ll be right with you.

Pause. Sam exits, passing by Robbie as he enters.

Nina What’s going on?

Nicholas (hushed) Right. Here’s the – ah, Rob. Perfect. Listen. Um. Listen. You know . . . Sam, I think, is trying to . . . how can I say this, um . . . forward his own agenda. Basically he’s going, I think he’s going to make a formal complaint. About us.

Nina About us? What for? Who to?

Nicholas I don’t know, this has come from someone who told me in confidence what Sam told them, which is that he’s essentially going to climb on top of us to get where he wants by grinding his axe on the whole ‘I’m gay, you’re prejudiced’ bit.

Nina What? No, that’s bullshit?

Nicholas I’m telling you. Me, you, Michael One, Two. Why would I lie? So if you wouldn’t mind standing in on this little chat, just so . . . You know, a united front –

Nina Erm. OK. Jesus, shouldn’t we get Michael Two in, just to –?

Nicholas No, let’s . . . see what he’s got to –

Sam re-enters.

Nicholas (taking Post-its off Nina) Thank you, Nina. Thank you, thank you. So. Sam?

Sam Yes, I’d just like a minute please.

Nicholas Sure. Shoot.

Sam Alone.

Nicholas No.

Sam No?

Nicholas No. Nein. Nay. C’est impossible. You see, if you’re planning on making any formal statements regarding your position here, I feel like I need to have someone else in the room. Standard protocol, you know. Just in case you were about to say something of great weight. In case the whole process of your transfer gets held up while whatever you’re about to say is investigated. It might temporarily put a stop on your transit, is what I’m saying. So. In light of that, what is it you would like to discuss with me today, Sam?

Sam (pause) Um . . .

Nicholas Sam? Anything?

Sam (pause) The, um . . . (Beat.) I think we should, uh . . . en – enforce an office policy of turning our machines off. Not just on standby. At lunch. And meetings, to set an example. You know? I think that would be a good idea . . .

Nicholas (smiles; points at him) For you, Samuel? Anything. (Pause.) Thanks, guys. If that’s everything –

Sam Oh, and there was a message for you from the selection committee. Your candidacy for local councillor is under review.

Nicholas (laughs) What?

Sam On the grounds of prejudice and discrimination towards a colleague.

Nina Sam, what are you doing? Is this about all of us?

Sam No, just him. Rumour has it that he, as my line manager, advised me to seek work in another department on the grounds that I was ‘a big queen’.

Nina What?

Nicholas He’s lying. Thanks, Sam, all right. Who’s ‘reviewing my candidacy’?

Sam The deputy fund-raising and members’ chairman for the Putney Association.

Nicholas Well, they don’t know what it was we spoke about do they, you fuck. It’s just your word against mine, because they weren’t there.

Sam Yes, they were.

Nicholas How were they?

Sam Because I was there.

Nicholas And?

Sam (unfolding a letter) And I’m the new deputy fund-raising and members’ chairman for the Putney Association.

Pause. Nicholas takes the letter and reads.

Sam You were right, Nick, with your reference I was able to get any job I wanted. Thanks for that.

Nicholas . . .

Sam Course, they thought I was grossly over-qualified but with the incumbent taking immediate leave and what with the selection for new councillors currently in motion they thought I’d better start straight away. My first job is to assess the suitability of candidates. I’m fine on three of them, there’s just a black mark against one. A claim of misconduct, doesn’t look good. (At Nina and Robbie.) Of course it will have to be qualified by other colleagues.

Nicholas (beat; claps his hands) Well bully for you, Miss Fucking Marple.

Nina Nicholas?

Nicholas I didn’t do anything, OK, Nina?! He’s making it up! Come on. Rob mate, you’re not going to go along with this, are you? He’s lying.

Robbie I dunno. You are the guy that asked what my sexuality was on my first morning.

Nicholas . . . (gasps in disbelief) . . . W – what? That was just. . . (Looks at Nina.)

Nina And I just think you’re a bit of a cunt.

Nicholas (pause; looks around; laughs; stops) Sam, come . . . Sammy . . .

Sam doesn’t flinch. Silence. Nicholas nods his head. Grabs his stuff. Pause.

Nicholas Just remember. That I said those things . . . because I wanted to help you, Sam. Because I wanted you to do well. Please at least remember that . . .

He leaves. Silence. Nina and Robbie break it, laughing.

Nina Shit the bed, Sam! I can’t believe that. And what’s this new job, deputy members’ –?

Sam Oh, it doesn’t matter, I’m quitting soon.

Robbie You’re what?

Sam Yeah, just wanted to make sure the right people made it on to the shortlist, then . . .

Nina And then what? (Excited.) You staying here?

Sam Nah, I think it probably is time to move somewhere different, you know.

Robbie I hear the Prime Minister’s position might be vacant soon. You could do that.

Sam (laughs) Well. I’d need to be an MP first.

Ted appears, standing at his desk with the card drawer open. Tim and Frank nearby, watching. Ted takes out one of the cards. . .

Nina Well, become an MP then, idiot. You’d be ace.

Sam Mmm, dunno. You kind of need more experience first. Like . . . I don’t . . . (Smiles knowingly.) A local councillor?

Nina For Wandsworth?!

Sam Ah-ah-ah. Cards close to your chest in this game, Neen. (Looks over to Ted.) Cards close to your chest. . .

Ted looks at Sam. He smiles, and rips the card, tossing it into the air and exiting with Tim and Frank as music grows. . .

Ray, Tommo, Michelle, Adam, Muznah, Shayne and

Heather enter, dancing over to Sam and tossing their own cards into the air.

Lights fade down.





Sons of York





Cast List


Sons of York was first performed at the Finborough Theatre, London, on 5 September 2008. The cast was as follows:

Mam

Colette Kelly



Dad

William Maxwell



Jim

Barry Aird



Mark

Steven Webb



Brenda

Kazia Pelka



Director Kate Wasserberg

Decor Alex Marker

Costumes Jenny Lee

Lighting Tom White

Sound Andrea J Cox

Musical Director Leigh Thompson





Characters


Jim, forty years old

Brenda, wife of Jim, thirty-nine years old

Dad, father to Jim, seventy-four years old

Mam, mother to Jim, seventy years old

Mark, son of Jim and Brenda, seventeen years old





Setting


Winter 1978–79. The living room of a family home in Hull.





Notes on the text


The play is written in an East Yorkshire dialect. When the word ‘the’ is missing from a sentence, it is usually indicated with a t’ – which should not be pronounced but remain silent.

Other notable distinctions include:

wan’t for ‘wasn’t’

din’t and in’t for ‘didn’t’ and ‘isn’t’

dun’t for ‘doesn’t’

A slash symbol / indicates that the character with the following line should begin speaking at this point.

(Text in brackets) indicates a line is spoken internally, or sotto voce.





Act One




Scene One


Early December 1978.

Dad’s house, Arthur Street, Hull. A living room. A door leads straight out on to a side yard. Another leads to a hallway and stairs, another to the kitchen. On a sideboard or dresser are models of AEC lorries and a framed photo of an AEC Mandator G4.

Jim stands with his coat on. Staring at Mam. She sits, head down, attached to a colostomy bag hanging from its apparatus. A dog starts barking outside. Dad shouts.

Dad (off) Argh, go’wan, out of it! Get! Oy, I’ll have you, yer little . . . Gowaaaan! Out! Stay!

He enters from outside, dumping some bags. He watches Jim watching Mam.

Dad Can talk to her, you know. Still hear you.

He leaves. Jim watches Mam. The dog barks outside.

Dad (off) Oy! Right, that’s it, yer little bastard! I mean it. Go’wan! Out! Oh gi’over, Mark, he’ll not bite. Knows who you are. Come on.

He enters the doorway with more bags, spinning back to shout outside.

Oy, don’t stroke him, though! Flamin’ ’eck, he’ll have yer hand. (To Jim.) Bloody. Gorra death wish, lad o’ your’n, or what?

Dad dumps the bags. Something smashes. Dad and Jim exchange looks.

Dad What were that?

Jim shrugs, mumbling ‘I don’t know.’

Dad Glass, or summat?

Jim Dunno, do I?

Dad Bringing glasses for? All this stuff, / can’t stay down here.

Jim I know, Dad, I did tell ’em, / just . . .

Dad Back room, have to be; / your room.

Jim Din’t know how long / we’d be staying, did we?

Dad Still, we’ll be all right, not we? Few weeks. Have a laugh, whatnot, eh? (Louder for Mam.) Ay up, Val, they’re ’ere. (To Jim .) How’s Aggie? All right?

Jim (shrugs) Yeah, Dad, fine, you know. Just . . .

Dad (referencing Mam) Said hello or owt yet? Still bloody hear you.

Jim (looks at his Mam. Struggles) She . . . ?

Dad ’S up?

Jim She all right? Like.

Dad Yeah, ’bout same. Why, when’d you last see her?

Jim Dunno. (Shrugs.) (Last week, or . . .)

Dad You what?

Brenda and Mark bundle in from outside with the last of the bags. Brenda is in her nurse’s uniform. Mark has a battered-looking acoustic guitar.

Brenda Phew! That’s last of it, Terry.

Dad That it?

Mark (sarcastically) Don’t worry, / Dad, we’ve gorrit.

Brenda Yep. Eeh dear, look at it all. Sorry, Terry, not / a place to stand now, is there?

Dad (taking the guitar and having a strum) Hee-hee, look at this. Jimmy Hendrix, ’ere.

Mark (putting a box down) Ow, me bastard finger.

Jim / Mark. Don’t.

Dad (louder) Ay up, Val, everyone’s here.

The general activity and noise stops as the new arrivals look at Mam. Beat.

Dad Our lodgers for over t’ winter and what have you. (Laughs.)

Brenda (beat; louder; moving to her) You all right then, Valerie?

Dad I say, road’s all right wi’ diversion?

Jim Yeah, just had to go down Bev Road / and, uh –

Brenda (to Mam still) Owt doing?

Jim – and back across on Anlaby. Ten minutes door to door / still, so . . .

Brenda Let’s take a look at you then, shall we? Ooh, cold today, eh, Val. Brr.

Dad Ay, it’s Hull Fair weather, in’t it? (Laughs, nudges Mark.)

Brenda (rubbing Mam’s hands) Feel them hands, / need to warm ’em up, don’t we?

Dad Hull Fair weather.

Mark Is / heating on, Granddad? Freezing.

Brenda God, do you know, I’d kill for your hands / when I’m your age, Val. Look at them compared to mine already. People’d kill for them. They would.

Dad (to Mark) What’s that? Eh, come on, sit yersen down, lad. Not staying or what?

Jim Course he is; we are. Mark, sit.

Dad I say, Brenda, she’s quiet today.

Brenda When d’you last get her seen, Terry?

Dad Ah, thee always say t’ same thing, you know. ‘Call if you need.’ ‘Gi’ yer bit of help.’ (Know what that means.) But, course, they don’t see her when she’s right, you know. They only . . . well, you know, see her when she’s under t’ weather. ’Cause o’ course that’s why I’ve called ’em out, in’t it. So, it – you know, it – you . . .

Brenda She had her tea today?

Mark / (We an’t.)

Dad Gorra bit down her. Normally stick it in fridge, case she wants it later on, like.

Brenda Mark, come and say hello to your Nan.

Dad (wiping nose with handkerchief) Or / I’ll have it, you know.

Mark (loud) Hello, Nana. / Y’all right?

Jim You gorra cold, Dad?

Dad As I say, quiet today. Yesterday, couldn’t shut her up, but . . .

Brenda She is a bit on the parky side, Terry. Got / to keep her warm.

Dad Her head, an’all, Bren. That keeps dropping forward, bit. / Is that –

Brenda Oh yeah. (Lifting her head.) Is it just when / she’s like dosing, or . . .

Mam (groaning from being touched) Urgh . . . my . . . what yer / der wi’ me . . .

Brenda ’S all right, Val, OK, just giving you a little checkup. Nodded off there, didn’t yer?

Mam (looking around) . . . Erm . . . urggh . . . (Tapping her head to think.) Where me, uh –

Dad ’S that, Val, all right?

Mam Shwhere me, uh, yuh . . . erm . . . (Shakes her head.) Nope. Gone. (Laughs.)

The others laugh politely along with her (Dad most), except Jim, who seems to get caught off guard, but joins in with a smile when he notices the others.

Brenda Say, I’ve got a portable kit in the car, Terry, tests blood pressure.

Dad What’s that?

Brenda Little monitor thing for blood pressure. ’S in t’ car. May as well, eh, while it’s here.

Dad Oh. Test her blood pressure eh? (Oh.) (Beat. Looks at Mark.) Bloody hell, hardly see you there, lad. Nowt on yer.

Mark Ge’ orr, I’m all right, Granddad.

Dad (jabbing playfully at his arm) Look at that, knock you over. Come on, hands up.

Mark (his hands up, laughing) Gerroff. ’Bout knock me over? Wouldn’t last a round.

Dad (back and forth, jabbing) What me, heavyweight champion of Arthur Street? Cor.

Mark Yeah, an’ I’m heavyweight champion of Humberside.

Dad stops, and cracks him round the back of the head.

Mark Ouch, / all right! That for?

Dad Oy! None of that swearing in this bloody house; on about ‘Humberside’. Day I recognise that bloody Tory creation, ’s day I start doin’ Lambeth friggin’ Walk. We’re Yorkshire’s, what we are, nowt else. That’s what thee bloody wanted. Cut us off. ’S only reason thee building us that bridge, make us feel like we’re not bloody forgotten.

Mark Eh, we caught sight of it other day, on way to Hessle, massive now. Huge. Middle bit of road meets ’tween them two legs. Towers. Things.

Dad Ay, well, certainly make a difference, give it that. Eh, Jim? And you, Mark, once you start. Crossing over there, ’stead of having to go all round.

Jim ’Bout fifty miles off, thee reckon.

Dad Ay, make it easier gerrin in and out of this little city of ours. Eh? (Jabbing Mark .) Ey, Marcus lad? Look. Telling yer, see, old man, get you to the ground, no problem.

Mark (laughing) Bollocks, could you.

Dad gets Mark into headlock as they begin to play-scuffle.

Dad Yeah, see, look, look at that then, eh? / No bother. Cor. Come on, little pansy, gerrin!

Mark Yeah, all right then. I’ll . . . ow, oy, all right, gerrof, Jesus!

It looks almost as though it will get out of control as they tumble across the room, Mark breaking free and fixing his hair.

Dad All right then, bloody hell. What, I an’t messed it, have I? Were a mess anyway.

Brenda He’s trying to do that spiky thing thee have now, but he can’t get it to stick.

Mark I can! Just takes time. / Needs to grow, dun’t it, and . . .

Dad (laughing) Spikey thing?

Brenda Got my side’s hair, I’m afraid. Stubborn as a mule.

Dad Factory all right? Oy, how’s yer lessons going, driving?

Mark Uh, OK thanks, Granddad, yeah.

Dad We wanna be getting you out, dun’t we; out on the road wi’ Aggie. Only forty-two payments left now, you know.

What’s that, Jim, sixteen years since? Year you were born, actually. Your dad already wi’ me at Tooley’s, Johnny just started. (Grabs the photo from the side.) ’S when we decided, all on us, on our dear old Aggie. (Look at her.) Like big girls, Mark? (Laughs.) Firm expanding, see, new fleet. Opportunity for a co-operative. I thought ‘I’ll have that! Yep’. Stake in a lorry. Every bugger in yard laughing, well, who’s pissing themsens now, eh? Forty-two payments left. Soon as you get cracking, that halves, two a month, ’stead of one. Not bad, eh, lad of your age, part-owning a truck, bloody Nora.

Brenda Mark, you thanked your Granddad for putting us up yet?

Mark Yeah. Yes. Thank you, Granddad.

Dad Well, that’s all right, that’s OK, thank you. Makes sense, dun’t it, heating one house ’stead of two, what wi’ everything up in’t air, fuel, food. Gonna have to bunker down aren’t we, get ready for the fight! Ho, ho. I’m looking forward to it, me, should be fun, eh? Mark? Altogether? Say, Ford back at work now, Jim. Victorious, pay rise in hand. See? That’ll be it now, flood gates. Ford were, um, you know. The what’s it. Thingy what comes first, leads the way. (Oh God. Go to the files.) Horse.

Jim Thee reckon us lot’ll be out after Christmas, Dad? Entire T&G.

Dad Ho, ho. See. (Claps his hands.) Ye-es, it’s coming. Biggest yet, I can feel it. Like ’26. Downing tools, altogether. Government, ‘no pay rises over five per cent’? Bloody . . . dunno how thee dare. Well, they’ll, they’ll . . . see, exactly. After Christmas, say?

Jim Yeah, New Year, reckon.

Dad ’Bout time, ’cause whatever they offer you, not be more than five, ’less Hell freezes – or should I say Hull freezes over. Ha ha. Eh, which it will, tellin’ yer. Bring this city, country, to a standstill, we can. That’s the . . . ’Bout your lot Bren’, what’s the chat?

Brenda No one’s said owt, Terry. Royal College of Nurses aren’t exactly the IRA.

Dad Yeah, but a general strike is / . . . well, means everyone, dun’t it, or . . .

Brenda Folk are always gonna need nurses, whether . . .

Dad Well, ay up, shall we have a brew, then start getting this lot up? / Take tea, Brenda?

Jim Come on, Mark, start gathering.

Brenda Lovely, Terry, thank you.

Dad (to Jim) Jim, tea?

Jim Ay, go on then.

Dad Tea, Mark?

Mark No, ta, Granddad.

Dad Uh?

Mark I’m all right, thank you.

Brenda Oh, just have a cup of tea, Mark, will you, Christ’s sake?

Mark All right, then, yeah.

Dad Yes?

Mark Yes, ta, Granddad. / (To Jim.) Ay up, what is sleeping arrangements, anyhow?

Dad So tea, tea, tea. Sugar? (To Brenda.) Sugar, Brenda?

Brenda / No thank you, Terry.

Jim You’ll be in back room, wi’ us.

Mark You what?

Dad Sugar, Jim?

Jim No thanks, Dad.

Dad Mark? Sugar?

Mark Three please, Granddad.

Mark/Brenda Mark.

Mark No thanks, Granddad.

Dad No?

Mark No, ta. Ay up, an’ all, am I really gonna have to share a room wi’ these pair?

Dad Why, how many rooms do you think we’ve got? ’S not Buckingham Palace you know. You’ll be right on floor, got cushions and blankets. So, three teas, no sugar.

Dad heads to the kitchen, mumbling ‘Three teas, no sugar’.

Mark Right, well, I don’t want you two gerrin’ up to owt.

Jim slaps him round the back of the head.

Dad (off) Ay up, we can make it Irish. Ha. Got that Scotch, Jim. What’s it? Glen doodah. (singing.) ‘A you take the high road, an’ I’ll take the low road, ta dee, ta la da, la . . . ’

Brenda is putting on elastic gloves to check Mam’s colostomy bag. Dad returns.

Dad (to Jim) Ay up, reckon ’bout trip to Rayners, pint or two, tomorrow evening, or nip into town, Black Horse? Pick up pasty and chips, way home? If / Bren’ not mind –

Brenda Bag’s a bit full, Terry.

Dad Eh? Is it?

Brenda (loud, to Mam) Nice and full, this, Val, eh? Good colour.

Dad Is it?

Brenda Mark, come here.

Mark What?

Brenda (unclipping the bag) Take this.

Mark Fuck off!

Jim slaps him, back of the head.

Mark Ouch! What?! / Bloody . . .

Jim Do as you’re told.

Mark Not touching that.

Brenda Oh grow up, Mark, you little git, it’s only urine.

Mark Where am I emptying it?

Brenda Where d’you bloody think? Toilet, upstairs! Daft ’aporth.

Dad Had some trouble wi’ it, mind. Flush. Keeps brekkin’.

Brenda (offering the bag to Mark) Here.

Mark (taking it, arms length) Fuck’s sake.

Brenda/Jim Mark!

Mark I’m going!

Dad Should be all right now, though. (Watches Mark cross the room.) Ay up, Mark.

Mark What?

Dad You taking the piss?

Dad, Brenda and Jim (who can’t help himself) guffaw into laughter. Then Mark.

Mark (laughs) Yeah, yeah.

Brenda Aw, is everyone picking on you, love?

Mark ’S all right. Used to it, aren’t I?

Dad (still laughing) Taking the piss . . . ha ha ha! Aw dear . . .

Brenda Not your fault, is it love? Born breached, weren’t you?

Mark Ge’orr, will you. Let me empty this, if I’m going.

Brenda Arrived backwards. Arse first into the world.

Dad Ay, well, it’s no wonder he talks out of it, then, in’t it?

They all laugh again. Loud, leg-slapping. Mark heads upstairs with the bag.

Brenda Always remember him ’bout fainting, Terry, reckoned his baby had two heads.

Dad Two heads! Ha ha ha. Ay up, bet you must have thought, ’ere, what’s the crack?

All burst into hysterics again.

Brenda (laughing, to Mam) ‘What’s the crack,’ Val? (Stands, makes for the stairs.) Aw, stop it, you buggers, I’m gonna wet mesen.

Dad (still laughing) What d’yer do when you saw . . . a-hu-hu . . . saw that sticking out?

Jim Nowt, I just, uh-uh . . . ay up, I just turned the other cheek!

All burst into more hysterics.

Brenda Aw God, I’m gonna have to go. ’Bout burstin’. (Exits at speed, still laughing).

Dad (wiping his eyes) Aw, dear dear. Ha ha ha . . .

They laugh into silence. Dad sits by Mam. He notices something in her hair and brushes it. He tugs at her clothes, straightening them. Mam winces and shifts. Dad takes out a pipe and tobacco and fills it. The kettle in the kitchen begins to simmer. . .

Dad Heard from your brother?

Jim Uh . . . no . . . (not, uh) . . .

Dad Out today?

Jim Uh, yeah.

Dad Up Brid, was it?

Jim Uh?

Dad Bridlington?

Jim Uh, no. Hudders . . . it were Huddersfield today. Brid were, um . . . Brid were Tuesday.

Dad Oh. (Oh, Huddersfield.) What drop?

Jim This, uh . . . just this, like, decorating place. Pallets of paint, you know.

Dad My last run, you know, Brid.

Jim Yeah.

Dad Ten year, now.

Jim (Yep.)

Dad Go M62 Huddersfield?

Jim Uh, no. Traffic / were bad, so I went –

Dad Straight across, in’t it. / Hour and half?

Jim No, traffic were murder, Dad, so took ’62 out on to t’ M1 then across on A638 down Dewsbury to / pick it up –

Dad Dewsbury? And then –?

Jim Yeah, then picked up / M62 near Brigham –

Dad Yer go past Brigham, then?

Jim Then off, yeah, then round on to A640, and that takes you as / good as in.

Mam (mumbling, loudly) Ma ba my, my . . . where’s . . . schjonny, me . . . why / is he me . . .

Dad He’s just popped down the shops, Val, back soon, OK?

Mam Sche back wha? John, where me . . . (Patting her pockets.) Wi’ me schthings, and –

Dad Yeah, Johnny’s got all your stuff. Back in a tick, eh. Shh. All right. (All right.)

Mam grumbles into silence.

Dad (pause) A6?

Jim – 40.

Dad Oh. (Oh. A640.) Good run?

Jim Were all right.

Dad Two?

Jim And a bit.

Dad Oh right.

Pause. Jim chuckles.

Dad What?

Jim Taking t’ piss.

Dad chuckles.

Jim Were good, that.

Dad Your lot playing Craven Park, tomorrow? Robins?

Jim Ay. Reckon it’s ours this year; top o’ league.

Dad We’re top o’ league.

Jim Yeah, League Two, Dad.

Dad Still bloody top o’ league, in’t it? Not lost a game all season. Be up wi’ you, next year. (Pause. Smokes his pipe.) Good road, 1035 Brid. Running along by t’ sea. Nice bit of sunshine. Nice bit of breeze. Window down. Easy curves, quiet road. Glad that were me last ’un. Last drop. Always enjoyed that road.

Dad holds Mam’s hand, looking at it. The kettle begins to whistle. Jim looks towards the kitchen, then at Dad. He makes to go and turn it off as Dad stands, heading into the kitchen. Brenda and Mark return from upstairs.

Brenda Phew. That were close. Need a bag o’ me own soon, crikey. You all right? Quiet.

Jim (shrugs) (Dunno, just . . . you know, just . . .)

Brenda (looks at Mam; back to Jim; quiet) Gunno have to . . . well, talk about it, some point. I hadn’t realised she’d gotten . . . well . . . so different. So soon.

Jim Well, it . . . (Pause. Watches her. Nudges her with his hand.) You all right, though?

Brenda Yeah. I’m all right. Long as you’re all right.

Mark (rolling a fag at the table) I’m all right an’ all, incidentally.

Brenda Oy you, outside with that. In fact, not at all.

Mark Why, he’s gorr’is pipe, an’t he?

Brenda Mark, would yer . . . ! Don’t be a gobshite today, please. Nuff on.

Mark Oy, I’m one what’s got stuff needs doing. Dunno why we can’t be at ours.

Brenda (referencing Mam) You bloody know why. Now, off your arse, / help with this.

Jim On about ‘stuff needs doing’ – what stuff?

Mark Work stuff. You know. (With air quotes.) ‘Factory work’.

Jim grabs Mark by the collar and pulls him in.

Mark (taken aback; quiet) What . . . ?

Dad returns from the kitchen. Jim lets go of Mark.

Dad Just stewing. Shall we get some of these up then, come on. Set to. (Looking at some of the records.) Garr, look at all this. Your music, Mark? All shouting and screaming.

Mark They’re angry, Granddad.

Brenda Aw, don’t get him / up on his soapbox, Terry, he’ll never come down.

Dad Angry, what thee angry about? Not living on rations, are thee, not seven-day weeks just to make do and mend, eh? On about angry. Not wearing rags, are yer? (Singing.) ‘And so I’ll go, from rags to riches.’

Ha ha ha! That was what’s-his-face. Thingy.

Jim Elvis.

Dad No, not bloody Elvis, thingy who lives up Kirkella. Used to make breezeblocks. David.

Brenda Whitfield.

Dad Whitfield. There we are. Whitfield. Sang with him, both did, oh yes. In the clubs. Uh, Newington – no, Tivoli. Tivoli Theatre. Course he had a go with the best of ’em, that boy. Bing, Frank, thingy-what’s-it. Not like this groaning they do now, bloody Elvis Presley, Billy thingummy-you-like, Jim. Gaarh.

Mark ’S all finished now, Granddad, we’ve gone back to proper music like what you had.

Jim That were proper music.

Mark (singing) ‘No Elvis, no Beatles, no Rolling Stones’.

Dad Good, get shot of the lot of them.

Mark and Dad exit up the stairs with bags. Brenda holds Jim back.

Brenda Oy. Not wanna spend a bit of time with your Mam? Go on, I’ve got these.

Jim What? No, I’m / . . . It –

Brenda (takes his bags) Look ’ere, go on. Have five minutes.

Brenda exits. Jim turns to Mam. He saunters over. He watches her. Beat. He sits next to her. Beat. He lifts his hand as though to take hers, but brings it down again. He looks around the room. Without looking at her, he slowly takes her hand in his.

Jim begins to struggle; stop himself from breaking. Bringing his clenched fist up to his mouth. Shifting around in his chair. Looking anywhere but at his Mam.

He covers his eyes with his free hand. The sound of the sea creeps in softly, as the peripheral lights of the room draw in. Jim calms. The faint sound of the fairground, as Jim and Mam are soon alone, bathed in a warm pool of sunshine. Jim lays his head back, resting the light on his face, as Mam turns her head to look at his hand.

‘I’m Gonna Sit Right Down and Write Myself a Letter’ by Vera Lynn begins. Mam turns away from Jim, and sings. Jim, a world away, begins to fade. . .





Mam


‘I’m gonna sit right down, and write myself a letter

And make believe it came from you . . . ’

She stands and approaches an old-fashioned, free-standing silver microphone, as the rest of the room fades and she’s alone in a spotlight.

‘I’m gonna write words so sweet, they’re gonna knock me off my feet,

A lot of kisses on the bottom, I’ll be glad I got ’em.

I’m gonna smile and say ‘I hope you’re feeling better’,

And close with love, the way you do,

I’m gonna sit right down and write myself a letter.

And make believe it came from you . . . ’





Scene Two


Evening. Dad and Mark are by a record player, playing chords on the guitar. Brenda sits with Mam, awake and smiling. Jim is at the table with a blood-pressure kit, the pad around his arm. They’re all eating fish and chips. Dad plays an ‘A’ and laughs.

Mark (arranging Dad’s fingers on the guitar) Then. E.

Dad (plays) Argh, bugger it.

Mark No, that were right. And . . . (Re-arranging.) C.

Dad (plays) Ay.

Mark There you go, them three chords, A, E, C. / Anyone can play, that’s the point.

Dad plays all three chords.

Brenda Chuck us vinegar, Jim.

Jim Next to yer foot.

Dad (finishing the guitar) Hey-hey, ’s good this, Jim. What d’you reckon?

Mark plays ‘Career Opportunities’ by The Clash on the record player, and begins jumping up and down, singing. Dad laughs, joining in with the guitar.

Mark (singing)

‘They offered me the office, offered me the shop,

They said I better take / anything they got,

Do you wanna make tea at the BBC?

Do you wanna be, do really wanna be a cop?’

Jim Oy, Mark. Calm down.

Brenda (clapping along) Do you like this, Val?

Mam (laughing) Ooh-hoo-hoo . . .

Brenda You done wi’ your fish? Look, ’nuther bite maybe. Come on.

Mark (singing)

‘Career opportunities are the ones that never knock

Every job they offer you is to keep out the dock,

Career opportunities, the ones that never knock!’

Dad Eh, what’s all that he saying then? Career opportunities? / Down the docks?

Jim Mark, off. Hear mesen think.

Mark (turns it off) It’s just about the whole thing, Granddad, how we’re bloody, frigging stuck in a rut and can’t afford no houses and job opportunities rubbish and just all t’ stuff our Mum and Dad’s had, with their money and flowers and hippy peace shit in t’ sixties we an’t . . . mean, it’s – we’re more like your lot, Granddad, not taking no shit.

Dad (laughs) Eh, this is marve – I like – Eh, ’s better than what you listen to, Jim.

Mark Nah that’s all music to play in a sweet shop, Granddad. It in’t rock ’n’ roll. All bobbing your head from side to side and skipping round like pansies.

Mam (laughing) Wi’ him up and sch-schinging, / and . . . and . . . hoo-hoo. Yeah, yeah. Um . . .

Dad Yeah, ’s right Val, remember?

Brenda How’s / your blood pressure, Jim?

Dad Well, I’m glad to see you’ve got musical streak in yer, lad.

Mam And shwell I neber. Well I, I never.

Brenda Yeah, / well I never, Val.

Jim ’S not working. Just says ‘error’.

Brenda (going over) Error? / Have a look. Not best time to do it, eating chips, course.

Dad Say, your father, course. Completely tone deaf, can’t sing a ruddy, a, a bloody note, you know. Eh, you should do a few what’s-it. Gigs, like. Get out there.

Mark Uh, yeah. Well, actually, I’d been thinking / about, um –

Dad Course thee probably don’t have old circuit any more, eh? What your Nan and I used to sing on. Newington. Uh, what’s it? Dance hall. Locarno. Eh, we wouldn’t have met, weren’t for that circuit, / back in them days.

Brenda (taking the pad off) Works fine, Jim. Christ, 110 over 70. / That’s gone up.

Dad Val, remember? Beverley Road baths. You and Kingston Communication Girls?

Mark Swimming?

Dad No, back in them days, might still . . . used to put a floor, wood floor over t’ pool, board it up, and have dances and that, dead popular. And she were there on stage singing wi’ the girls. I hadn’t started sing – (Louder.) I hadn’t started singing that point, eh, Val. You know, public. But you were, on t’ stage. The Vera Lynn of Ryde Street, eh?

(Singing.) ‘Pennsylvania six five thousand.’

(Laughs. Eats his chips.) Course, after t’ war, I come back, and I’m like, ‘Where’s Hull gone? Half of it’s bloody missing.’ But more theatres up here than in West End before that. Come back, that’s gone, and – (indicating Jim) my baby boy over there’s now bloody eight, walking, bloody talking. And then your uncle were born. Still managed to get out there, bit. Eh, Val? Oh yes.

Dad takes Mam’s hands in his and swings them as he sings. Mam laughs.

Dad (singing)

‘When a man has a son, like my son John,

He’s a man who can smile when he talks,

And the eyes have a sparkle,

And he walks with his head held high . . . ’

Mam laughs and claps her hands as Dad leaves her, laughing, dancing.

Dad Aw, there were some greats what sung there, kiddo, Bev Baths. Tommy Fisher and his band. And, eh, ’parrently Louis Armstrong himsen popped in, 1930s sometime.

Mark What? Bollocks.

Dad ’S true, ooh ay.

Mark What were Louis Armstrong doing in Hull?

Dad Dunno, do I. Passing through.

Mark You can’t pass through Hull, ’less you wanna get wet.

Dad Mark. Cheek.

Mark Eh, you know Mike Ronson were born up Bev Road, Granddad. Him in Spiders from Mars, David Bowie. / Amazing, in’t it.

Dad Who? Oh ay, yeah. / Local lad, that band.

Mark Can’t believe he were in Uncle John’s year at school! Fucking love them. /

(Singing.) ‘Ground control to Major Tom.’

Dad Well, Johnny probably played wi’ him, like. Used to like a sing. Pair o’ lungs on him. (Nearly at the end of his chips, reading the newspaper.) Oop, look Jim, ’ere – oh, same as what we read yesterday (Hull Daily Mail). ’Bout BP and Esso drivers striking. See? Petrol stations be empty, few weeks. Though makes me wonder, way some report it, on telly and that, you wouldn’t think it were workers exercising their right, fair pay for a fair day’s work. ’S like they’re all coming right-wing again. Oh yes. It happens, telling yer, I’ve seen it before. Used to believe we were a nation of Labour voters who’d now and again get scared and edge right, but now I’m starting to think it’s other way round, and deep down we’re just a nation full of bloody Tories.

Mark Reckon Labour’ll be out next time, Granddad?

Dad Nah, they just need remembering their roots, dun’t thee? What they stand for.

Brenda (standing and starting to clear) Ay well, we din’t even vote for this guy, did we – just got in when other ’un left. Ask me, / ’s about time . . .

Dad Well, got to say, expected more of Callaghan. Union man. Mean, I know it’s backs against wall time, economy buggered, but it’s not – you’re not even demanding t’ world, are you? Just a return to collective bargaining. Unions and employer working out pay, not bloody government stopping this and saying that. ’S bloody . . .

Mark But in’t that what Maggie wants, her lot?

Dad Ge’orr, wi’ you, lad! Talk to me about her; gladly see the back o’ working man. No, have to preserve this lot no matter what, because if we don’t, others’ll be in. And folk, they’ve short memories. They forget. Well better a, you know, like a struggling Labour government than them back, any day, oh yes. / Oh yes!

Mark I know, just saying. Aren’t they into freedom and business and / enterprise and –

Dad Freedom and –? Oh ay, no, they always say, said it last time, them rich bastards at top do well and it all trickles down. Well bugger it, ’s never trickled as far as Hull.

Mark Maybe that’s why they’re building t’ bridge across Humber.

Jim Mark.

Dad (pointing at him) Yeah, you joke. ’Cause I’m warning you. Bloody . . . all this. You wait, they get in, and all this . . . wait and see. ’Cause it’s you gorra live with it, not me. But we’re surviving, us lot. Just. By t’ skin of our teeth. Eh, Jim? Enemies at our door, drawbridge is up, Keep’s gotta hold. But we’ve been here before, oh ay, ’26, General Strike. (Louder.) Eh, Val? ‘Not a penny off the pay, not a second on the day!’ Still, you’ll not mind, eh, Mark, not having to go to t’ factory. Ha ha. Bloody blessing, I’ll bet. You can join me and Dad down’t Docks.

Mark Huh. Can’t imagine me dad wi’ a placard in his hand, chanting.

Jim Eh, I’ve done my share.

Mark What, when you missed that bus? (Laughs.)

Dad (laughs) Ha ha ha!

Jim Yeah, ha-bloody-ha. Who told – (Points at Dad.) That were him, I take it.

Mark What were it, Granddad, summet . . . ?

Dad It were T&– no, CND rally, Aldermaston. What year, Jim? Fifties? Big un. Gorr’im sen dressed up, made his signs, not normally like that, mind. All his mates going. Bus left outside Hammonds eight o’clock and he bloody missed it. (Laughs.)

Mark (laughs) Aw, Dad . . .

Jim It left bloody early, I were there, eight o’clock.

Dad Folk never let him forget it.

Jim (You bloody don’t.)

Brenda Ah well, ’s good job you did, otherwise you’d probably have been arrested.

Dad Argh, what’s that gorra do wi’ price of fish?

Mark Haven’t you ever done owt else?

Jim Marched wi’ dockers, and . . . eh, ’ark at you, what you bloody . . . ? There an’t been owt to flamin’ . . . you know, get all up about, has thee. Struck ’69, over t’ White Paper.

Mark Din’t join Rolling Stones in what’s-it Square, then? / Grosvenor.

Jim Look at ’im, on like I’m – had to bloody look after you, din’t I?! And there an’t been owt to . . . Oy, I’m bloody ’ere, aren’t I, now? Gonna be out on front line! Friggin’ . . .

Brenda All right, Jim. Settle down. Can’t we just watch telly or something?

Dad Gar, there’ll / be nowt on.

Brenda Dick Emery not on. / You like him, Terry.

Dad Oh, yeah we like him, though.

Mark Oy, do yer impression, Dad. That priest one he does.

Jim Nah, can’t be arsed.

Brenda / Oh, Jim.

Dad Eh, / like him, Val, don’t we?

Mark Or yer Tommy Cooper.

Jim No.

Mark Go on. (Imitating.) ‘Just like that.’

Dad (laughs; imitates) That Tommy Cooper? ‘Just like that.’ Ha ha. ’S good, that.

Mark I prefer Kenny Everett to Dick thingy.

Brenda What’s that one he does? (Imitating.) ‘Oh, you are awful.’ I like that.

Mark I like – (Imitates, leg crossing etc.) ‘But it’s all done in the best pah-sibble taste!’

He looks hopefully at the others, who exchange ‘unsure’ glances in silence. Beat.

Brenda (clearing up the papers) Everyone done / wi’ their rubbish?

Dad Arh, stick it on then, if you want. Maybe catch sports round-up. Hoo-hah! Nuther win for the Arlie Birds! Ay up, Mark, you picked your team yet, or what?

Mark (still digging round his chips) Nah, Granddad, I’m not really into it, rugby –

Dad Come on, lad, ’s only a bit of fun. Eky, and don’t just go pickin’ Rovers, ’cause of your father. We’re in West Hull, ’member, that’s F.C. territory.

Mark Dad dun’t really support Rovers.

Jim I do.

Mark Yeah, but not really, really –

Dad Ah, ’cause it’s only bit o’ fun, in’t it? We picked out a hat, Jim, din’t we? When they were little. Just to make t’ pools bit more interesting. Ended up me and Johnny got Hull F.C. and your dad and yer nan, Kingston Rovers. Din’t mean owt then, as I say, just made weekly pools more interesting, different teams. ’Cept Wembley, ’59! Oho-ho, your dad wan’t half green. Me and Johnny went down, cup final, Wigan.

Jim Yeah, and Rovers were Wembley final, ’64, Widnes.

Dad Yeah, you didn’t bloody go though, did yer?!

Jim Couldn’t afford to bloody – and had to work! Better game, though! Better than yours!

Dad Ah, what’s it matter?! Both bloody lost, din’t we?

Mark (laughing) Have either ever won owt?

Dad Course thee . . . what’s he on wi’?

Mark I bet if Hull played Hull it’d still somehow end up that Wigan won.

Jim / Dad (exchanging glances) We’re top o’ league!

Jim Dad, you’re League Two!

Dad Still top o’ league, in’t it?! Bloody hell!

Brenda Doing pools next week, Terry? Or we gonna try and cut back a bit?

Dad What? ’S only few pence, ge-orr wi’ yer. Just a bit of fun. If we din’t put in and turns out coulda won, you be sore then, wun’t yer?

Mark Y’ever won owt?

Dad Bits and bobs, here and there. (Sneering.) And course your dad and Val’s ‘famous win’. Which we still don’t know what thee spent it on, but there y’are.

Jim You never wanted to bloody know! He were right, jealous.

Dad And I still don’t wanna know; / I’m not bothered.

Jim Were only a couple of quid.

Mark When were this?

Dad Normally me and Johnny what did well, mind. Then thems two sneak in wi’ a little win. Bloody big-headed for days, he were. I said, ‘Just go off and spend it! I can’t be doing wi’ yer!’ And whatever it were, thee came back end o’ day, smile on their face which, Mark, were, shall we say, an infrequent occurrence, your dad, that age. Well, nowt new appeared in t’ house, so thee must have frittered it away on summat silly. Unless there’s a mansion somewhere in Beverley I don’t know about.

Jim Dad, I’ll bloody tell yer if you want.

Dad No, I don’t bloody care. (Nowt to me. Did what you want.)

Jim chuckles, as suddenly Mam stands shakily and starts shuffling out. Brenda and Dad leap to her aid, grabbing the colostomy bag apparatus.

Dad Whoop, / steady there, steady.

Brenda Whoa, all right there, Val. Just going for a little walk, are you?

Dad Ay, she’ll be right, probably just thinks it’s time for bed. Ay up, which it is. Here.

Brenda Phoaw. She shot up quick, didn’t she? / Blimey.

Dad Ay, that’s thing, if she wants to get somewhere, she’ll get, like. I’ve gor her, now.

Brenda Sure she’s all right up them stairs, Terry?

Dad Oh ay, we always manage. Come on, Val, up we go, there we are, that’s it . . .

Brenda Mark, help your nan and granddad, will yer? Sat / there like a lump.

Dad Nah, we’re all right.

Jim Mark. Up.

Dad and Mam exit, shuffling up the stairs. Followed by Mark.

Brenda looks at Jim.

Brenda (sighs) Jim.

Jim What?

Brenda You know what. Look / at her –

Jim What. She’s right.

Brenda He seems to think that this is just a . . . a temporary thing, that she’s gonna get better. Or stay the same. And she isn’t. Jim. It’s gonna get worse –

Jim He not . . . Bren, you know what he’s – he’ll not listen, he’s –

Brenda You don’t know, he might be waiting for someone to say summat, offer help. Jim, cupboards were bare; he’s not eating, so she’s not eating, it’s North Pole in ’ere –

Jim Bren, I . . . Please, I can’t . . .

Brenda Look, I know it in’t easy.

Jim (moving away, shifting around) (Please . . .)

Brenda Jim, I know. All right? I do know.

Jim struggles, rubs the back of his neck, doesn’t look at her. . .

Brenda (taken a bit aback by how upset he is) Jim . . . ?

Jim D’yer ’ark at him, eh? Smug little . . . gi’in it all working-class solidarity.

Brenda You what?

Jim When tomorrow he’ll have his nose back in a bloody textbook.

Brenda (pause; warmer, now) Aw, what’s up? Were they taking Mick out on yer? (Moving into a hug.) Well. I like Elvis. And I like the Kinks. And I quite like you, sometimes. Come here. (Hugs tighter.)

Jim Hmm. (Sighs. Pause. As Sean Connery.) Ah, Mish Moneypenny. I mush be dreaming.

Brenda chuckles. Mark thumps back down the stairs and they break. Jim sits back down and puts the blood-pressure pad back on.

Mark So what we saying about tomorrow, then?

Jim ’Bout what?

Mark ’Bout where I’m gonna be. He thinks I gonna be at factory, dun’t he?

Jim Awh, look. No, what’s it matter, sixth form or factory, you’re out in the day aren’t you? And he not bloody know. It in’t time now, what wi’ . . . It in’t time.

Mark Never is, is it?

Brenda September were the right time, when he started.

Jim I know, Bren! Yes. Should have just said. Straight out. I know, but she . . . (Indicates Mam.) What wi’ everything just . . . starting, I . . . I just couldn’t find a –

Mark I don’t even think he’ll mind, much.

Jim Are you soft? All he’s been going on about. Forty-two payments left. Forty-one –

Mark I can’t help it if I don’t wanna drive lorries, Dad. If / I want summat else to –

Jim Aw, I know, all very DH bloody Lawrence, in’t it? Flippin’ –

Mark Christ, it in’t even like it’s – Half lads I know have stayed on, it’s just what you do now. And Mam got her training, bloody Uncle John upped and left, so why all of a sudden is it up to me to –

Jim Fine! Well, you bloody say summat then! Gi’ him summat else to . . . bloody – (Rips the pad off his arm.) Argh, this bastard thing, it in’t working.

Mark (sits, puts the pad around his arm) ’S cause you need a pulse to check pressure.

Dad returns from upstairs.

Dad Oy, what’s shouting? (Pause.) Just having a lie-down. Better today, though, eh? Than yesterday. (Looks at Mark with arm up, elbow in table.) What you up to, there?

Mark Just testing me blood pressure, Granddad.

Dad (sitting) Thought you were wanting an arm wrestle, hand up like that. (Takes his hand.) Grr. Come on then, let’s have yer.

Mark Ge’or, you’ll mess up me reading.

Dad Come on, you can do better than that, young lad like you. (Wrestling. Slams it down.) Urh! There. Blood and stomach pills, lad, your nan could do better. No upper-arm strength, that’s your problem, same wi’ your dad. No strength in his arms. ’Cause all the drops are unloaded wi’ fork-lifts now, of course. Not handballing like what we had to do back then. (Imitating the tossing of boxes.) One, heave, two, heave. Grrr. (Claps his hands and offers his arm again.) Come on, then, one more.

Mark (standing) Nah, I’m all right, Granddad, you’ve hurt me arm.

Dad Have I bollocks. Come on, sit. Not leaving this table till you beat me.

Jim Just sit down, Mark. Christ’s sake.

Mark sits. They arm wrestle, Mark beginning to really try.

Dad (laughing) That’s it. Eh up, look, he’s goin’ red. Come on. What’s the matter with yer? Eh up, referee, look at that. Elbow off table. Disqualification, that is, come on.

Mark stands now, serious, really pushing down, shaking. He uses both hands.

Dad Cor blimey, up on his feet, and he still can’t take me down. Look at that.

Jim Oy, Mark, calm down.

Dad (standing) Nah, he’s all right, if that’s how we’re playing, look. Cwooar. . .

Dad starts pushing Mark’s hand the other way. He grabs Mark by the back of the neck and starts pushing his whole body down on the table. Mark yells out a bit.

Brenda Oy! / Go easy, both on yer. Watch that monitor.

Dad Yeah, you having that, are you, having that? This how we’re playing, is it? Little cheat, are you, Mark?! Have to cheat to win, eh?!

He wins, and raises his hands on a triumphant walk. Mark lying on the table.

Dad There we are, there we go. Undefeated. Eh by gum. Phew. (Claps his hands together.) Right, Jim. Up next.

Jim Nah, I’m –

Dad Semi-finals. Winner plays me. (Sits Jim down.) Mark, come on. Father versus son.

Mark No, I’m all right actually.

Dad Oy, stop whining like a little girl, it’s only a bit of fun. Winner gets my jumbo sausage, how about that?

Mark Well, it in’t fair, I’m coming off the back of three bouts / and he’s fresh as a –

Dad Oh, will you shut your cake hole, Mark, and just wrestle your bloody dad. Go.

They arm wrestle, Dad cheering them both on, as the room begins to fade.

‘Who’s Taking You Home Tonight?’ by Vera Lynn plays. Mam appears at her microphone. Dad sees her, and steps forward, out of the scene as it fades to black.

Mam (singing)

‘They met at a dance, in a waltz of romance,

Strangers, but strange as it seems,

The girl’s heart was thrilled, her dream was fulfilled,

As these words, from the boy, of her dreams . . . ’

Mam moves towards Dad, and they hold each other, beginning to turn.

Dad (singing)

‘Who’s taking you home tonight,

After the dance is through.

Who’s going to hold you tight,

And whisper, ‘I love you, I do . . . ’





Scene Three


Afternoon. Jim is at the table, his back to Mam, gluing pieces to a model ship. A completed ship in a bottle sits nearby. Mam is pale, covered in a tartan blanket. Jim opens a lunchbox and begins eating a sandwich. He never looks at her while talking.

Jim Meant to be for me lunch. This snap. And on my what’s it . . . my clock, it’s, like. Well. Breakfast, at moment. That’s problem, Mam. Overnight jobs. Can handle t’ sleep thing. Ne’er been a problem. It’s food what gets yer. Gets me, any road. Body still wants lunch at lunch and tea at tea. This is me eating me lunch at what should be, on my clock, me breakfast. But I already ate me breakfast. At real breakfast. So. Now I’ll have to eat my ‘real-time’ tea at ‘my-clock’ lunch which means when it gets to ‘my-clock’ tea, ‘real-time’ breakfast . . . (Chews, thinks.) I’ll have run out of food.

He finishes his sandwich and gets back to his model. It distracts his speech flow. . .

Royal Sovereign, Mam. Really, uh . . . dead. Intricate, like. Piddly little thing, but prefer these. Dunno why, really, just . . . like ’em. Royal Sovereign were one what fought at Trafalgar. ’Cause Nelson’s plan, like, were to have our ships in two horizontal rows what pierced through French vertical line, meaning French top half had to sail back round to get their broadside, side wi’ guns, back facing us again, leaving us time to concentrate on their rear. Well this ship, captained by chap called Collingwood, were head of one line, and Nelson, in Victory, them’s other. And it were Sovereign what reached enemy line first, splitting it. Had a copper bottom. See? But this Collingwood, he never got credit what Nelson did. Weren’t as flash, you know. Weren’t as . . . dunno, just . . . had a, a . . . a measured mind. And a quiet. Courage. You know. And it’s that what . . . (what, uh) . . .

Brenda enters from outside with bags of shopping, followed by Mark, helping.

Brenda How do? Look at this stray child I picked up off the street, way back from school.

Mark (College.) Eh, Dad, guess what?!

Jim Mark! Have to shout all t’ time, always shouting.

Brenda Oh, leave him. / All right, Val? How are we? (Feels Mam’s forehead. Sighs.)

Mark Guess who came into school today?

Jim The teachers?

Mark Only Philip fuckin’ Larkin. (Laughs.)

Brenda Jim, I’ll drop you off at yard on me way round to Infirmary.

Mark He’s librarian up at Uni. Read one of his poems out. Was the bollocks, man.

Jim And does this Philip Larkin, poet and wordsmith, use language like what you do?

Mark No, he uses much worse.

Brenda Ten minutes, all right? Can’t be late today.

Jim (turning, seeing the shopping) Lot there.

Brenda Jackson’s was full, folk just taking things, panicking, thought I better gerrin quick.

Jim Ay up, you gonna hear owt from your lot today? What thee been saying?

Brenda They’re not saying much, Jim. No one bloody knows what’s gunna happen.

Jim But if thee do call you out, though? (Waits.) Bren’?

Brenda Then we’ll see, not we.

Jim What do you mean, ‘we’ll see’? Bre-en . . .

Brenda I mean, I’m a nurse. Jim. And mother. And Wife With House And Kid And Two Elderly Parents-In-Law. / Is what I mean.

Jim Ay, eh, eh, I’m just . . . he’s gonna expect you to be here, in’t he?

Brenda And why? For ‘solidarity’ or because he expects me at home to look after . . . well . . .

Jim That in’t fair. Bren. / And this is his house. If he –

Brenda I don’t work wi’ trucks, Jim. It’s people. Yes, and we’re here to help him. / Not . . .

Jim And if factory you’re meant to be at goes, Mark, he’s gonna expect you to be here.

Mark Well I can’t be, I’ve got classes. Exams. / We’re just gonna have to tell him.

Jim Oy, aren’t you wanting to get involved anyway? Bloody student, / thought you’d be –

Mark Not if it means failing!

Jim And your teachers won’t cross picket line anyway, will thee? / Public servants.

Mark And if we don’t now, bloody when? New Year? Easter? After I’ve passed me exams?

Jim If you pass your exams.

Pause. Mark grabs the shopping bags.

Mark Thanks, Dad. (Exits into the kitchen.)

Jim (off Brenda’s look) What? What do you want me to do, eh?

Brenda Nothing, Jim. Bloody nothing. (Exiting.)

Jim Bren, if you don’t tell what’s gerrin on your wick, I can’t bloody . . . can I?

Brenda exits with the bags. The dog starts barking outside. We hear Dad yell it to be quiet. He enters with a lead and a newspaper. Mark and Brenda come back in.

Dad How do, how do. Good days, all? (Louder, kissing Mam on the forehead.) Back, Val! Well, I say, Jim. Everyone. It’s all going on now. Swung by yard, wait till you get down there. Had a word with Smithy, word is entire T&G being called out, 3rd of Jan.

Jim 3rd of Jan?

Dad Everyone, haulage drivers, private, public, trains, buses, even ambulance. Tools down from 3rd of Jan. Spread across whole country. This has been brewing. It has. And I’ll tell you summet for nothing, he’ll wish he’d called that election when he had the chance, oh yes. Bloody hell, ’cause if he had, he’d have scraped in, just. But now, ho! (With the paper.) See. Here, calling it ‘Winter of Discontent’. Get ready.

Mark Richard III, that.

Dad Eh?

Mark Shakespeare. ‘Now is the winter of our discontent, / Made glorious summer by this son of York.’

Dad Be your lot an’ all, Bren, surely. ’Bout you, Mark. What’s chat at work? Owt new?

Mark Uh. I got promoted today, Granddad.

Dad You’ve what? What d’ya mean?

Mark (glaring at Jim) Been promoted. To hot dogs.

Dad Oh. Oh. Hot dogs. What were you on before?

Mark Uh, I was on fish paste before. It’s like the lowest of the low. Me. Pete. Danny with the gammy leg. Russian Mike. But they liked what I was doing on the ol’ paste front, see, so I’ve leapt up the ladder. To hot dogs.

Dad Well. Eh up, don’t get too comfortable there, lad. Remember it’s only part-time.

Mark They say if I keep my nose clean, get me head down, like, they reckon one day I might make it all the way to turkey drumsticks –

Dad’s back is turned. Jim gives Mark a jab in the arm.

Mark Oww . . . Was your day, / then, all right?

Dad Turkey drumsticks, eh? Blimey. Ooh, what were that . . . (Thinks.) Ooh, go to the files, the fish, urgh, awful fish, around after the war, only thing you could bloody get.

Mark / Tuna?

Dad She’d know. (Loudly.) Remember. Val? No, not . . . It were, like, canned / summat –

Mark I hate tuna.

Dad Really oily, like. Snoek! That were it. (To ‘the files’.) Thank you. Big tins of Snoek. Yurk. Remember that. Horrible. Horrible fish. Oily it were, yurk. Turkey drumsticks, then, eh? Well, what thee saying your place? What union you wi’?

Mark Uh. Same as dad. Transport and General.

Dad Who’s shop steward, good man? What’s his name?

Mark It’s, um. Er, Don.

Dad Don? Don what?

Mark Don. John.

Dad Don John? Don’t know him, Labour man? No Johns in t’ club, I know of.

Mark It’s . . . that’s . . . No, John’s his, his middle name.

Dad What’s his last name?

Mark Erm, it’s. Uh. Juan.

Dad (pause) Don John Juan? Where’s he from, name like that?

Mark Uh, Grimsby, I think.

Dad You’re having me on.

Jim Course he is, Dad. Mark, stop mucking about.

Dad (laughing) Don John Juan? Where’d that come from? Who is it, then?

Jim It’s what’s it. Thingy’s lad. Rob.

Dad Rob?

Jim Nob. Son. Rob, Robert Nobson.

Brenda (Jesus Christ.) I’ll be in the kitchen, unpacking. (Exits.)

Dad You out then, Jim?

Jim Yeah, ’bout ten minutes.

Brenda (shouting, off) Five minutes!

Dad Chelmsford?

Jim Yeah, return load from Ipswich tomorrow morning.

Mark Can I go upstairs, Dad?

Jim (pronounced) Yes. Please do.

Mark exits.

Dad A15 down Peterborough? Gi’ Aggie a chance, stretch her legs, eh?

Jim Erm. Uh, tin’t Aggie, Dad.

Dad Wass that?

Jim Driving, erm . . . ’nuther one, this drop. She can’t . . . s’ not right for this kind of . . .

Dad What d’yer mean? She got summet up? ’S wrong wi’ yer? Take Aggie.

Jim It’s a big load, Dad, she’s –

Dad She’s fine, what you / on wi’, talkin’ about –

Jim Have these new set of Volvos in t’ yard. F88s.

Dad Volvos, eh? Fuck a duck. Am I meant to be impressed?

Jim Da-ad. Just. Got new cabs, an’t thee, like all t’ new ones. More comfortable and –

Dad Gorra new Swedish / model then, have you, eh?

Jim – no draft coming through t’ peddles, you know. Sixteen- / speed gear box . . .

Dad Draft? Ge’orr. Sixteen-speed, eh? Swedish. Gonna start listening to Abba, are you?

Jim Smithy just . . . reckons longer distances are better on . . . (you know, just) . . .

Dad Right. I see.

Brenda (enters, putting her coat on) Right. Going, or what? (Loud.) See you later, Val!

Mam Shwhere’s me, whaayaa be, be, goin’, / don’t – no! Shdon’t wana ba goin’ . . .

She starts scrambling out of her chair. Brenda and Dad try to hold her.

Dad All right, Val. Shh. / That’s OK. We’re here.

Brenda Bloody hell. / Come on, Val, stop it now.

Mam (increasingly angrier) Want me ga da back, and – just le’ go, me bloody . . . ! (Lashing out.) Wi’ you gerroff / scher bloody . . . !

Brenda All right, come on then, if you’re coming. Up we get.

Mam Nah, shjust le’ me, le’ me be, / yer . . . shjer wanna just . . .

Dad OK. OK, we’ll leave you. All right? OK, Val? Shh. It’s all right. Just me and Bren. And Jim. And Johnny’s just popped down the shops. We’re all just here, OK?

Mam groans.

Dad OK? (Walks away, wiping his nose.) Urgh, dear dear. (Sighs.) Urgh, dear me . . .

Brenda (sighs; pause) Terry.

Dad Her old man were like it, yer know. Went through same thing. The mind just . . . it, you know, it . . . (Urgh dear.) (Sits) Family. Must just run in . . . her side, I mean, just . . .

Brenda Terry.

Jim Brenda.

Brenda (to Jim) Just . . . (To Dad.) Have you . . . thought any more about looking at . . . I don’t . . . Maybe we could revisit t’ idea of . . . getting a bit of help. For you and Val.

Dad Help? Aw no, Bren, ta, love, know you mean well, but we’re not . . . We’re all right. (Louder.) We’re all right, aren’t we, Val? Just . . .

Brenda I’m sorry, Terry, I know it’s hard. / But even if just over the next few weeks.

Dad Hard, what’s hard? In’t hard, it’s just –

Brenda I mean, there are places she can go, / you know. Give you a rest. Her a rest.

Dad Oh no. No, no, no. She’s not . . . This is best place for – She gets confused as it is. No.

Brenda What Val’s got, it’s not like a normal . . . nobody really knows much or – but it, it’s like a disease / in the –

Dad Disease?

Brenda – in the brain, which . . . It isn’t something that gets better over time, it –

Dad She . . . them places, that’s where, I’ve seen, her brothers, thee put her mam and dad in one of them, like bloomin’ . . . asylums, prisons, bars on the window and –

Brenda No, Terry, not any more, there are nice places –

Dad You see ’em, I’ve seen ’em, they, they just . . . The light in their eyes, you see it just . . . They go, Brenda. They just . . . they disappear. (Pause.) Thingy, June. Uh, uh, Phil’s wife, she – remember, Jim? They don’t . . . well, they don’t bloody come out, do they?

Brenda There are places now that . . . like that one up near Bev we looked at, one that said we could call any time if we . . . Places that might cost a little bit, but –

Dad Ah, yes, see? Bloody expensive an’ all, when there’s no, no need. Mean we’ve got you here now, an’t we, to . . . and once unions call you out, you’ll be around all the –

Brenda Terry. I’m not always gonna be around, something needs . . . It can’t stay like it is–

Jim OK, look, can we –

Music and some thumping starts to sound from upstairs.

Dad And everything up in air wi’ strike, you – we can’t, there’s no place it can come from.

Brenda Well. There’s . . . (sighs.) I know it’s not ideal. But. There’s the Aggie payments –

Jim / Bren.

Dad Oh no. No. We can’t, that’s . . . (Looking.) Flamin’ . . . What bloody ’ell is that?

Jim Just. Mark, wi’ music. / (Shouting up.) Mark!

Brenda Just to skip a few while / Val is looked after –

Dad No, it’s, that’s, it’s an investment, Bren. Once that’s paid it, it, it pays for itself, wi’ commission, ’cause it’s our truck, then, what Tooley’s are using. Forty-two more, then / maybe we can start think –

Bren Terry. By the time that’s paid, in / a couple of years . . . I’m sorry, but she’ll not be –

Jim Look, this is wrong time to be . . . Let’s . . . (Shouting up.) MARK, WILL YOU CUT IT OUT!

Instant lights down on the living room. Lights up on Mark, in his room, standing, listening to ‘Starman’ by David Bowie, dancing erratically, tugging at his clothes, stomping his feet, miming along, and flailing his arms out.





Scene Four


Wizard’s ‘I Wish It Could Be Christmas Every Day’ fades in over the top.

Afternoon. Box of decorations on the floor. A small tree in the corner. Jim is standing on a chair, hanging a string of cards across the wall. Mam is lifeless in her chair.

Brenda (shouting from the kitchen, off) No, there’s nowt doing, Jim. It’s all off. (Entering.) Nothing coming out, upstairs or down.

Jim Great.

Brenda Aw, God, sign of things to come or what? Like going back to t’ pissing three-day week, we’ll have lights going out soon. Well I don’t know what we’re gonna do for tea, then. (Watches Mam. Louder.) Eh, Val? What can we do, no water?

Mark enters, dumping his bag, covered in some grime.

Brenda Ooh, eh up. Prodigal son returns. What you covered in?

Mark You’ll never guess. Eh, Dad, look. Mate who’s in me English class. His uncle runs butchers on Newland. So I grabbed a lift wi’ him from college, swing by uncle’s, and look. (Laughs.) Rubbed me arms and hands down in some ’ot shit he were throwing out, make it seem like I’ve done a proper day’s work for a change. Ha ha. Good eh?

Jim You silly prick.

Mark What? Only meant to be funny; thought you’d be pleased. Keeping t’ secret.

Brenda Ah well, you’ll not be laughing when you find out there’s no water for a bath.

Mark Fucking what?

Brenda / Jim Oy!

Mark No, I’ve had enough, it’s like being in t’ fucking Dark Ages.

Brenda I’ll go across t’ street, see if everyone’s same as us.

Mark Why’s it stink of polish?

Brenda Your nan had a little accident is all. It’s only thing we could find to mask t’ smell.

Mark An’t done a very good job.

Jim (losing it, briefly) Mark, would you cut it out for just a bloody minute!

He gets down off his chair. Riffles through a box, fetching some lights out, which he begins to wrap around the tree. The dog barks outside.

Jim Back ten bloody seconds and you’re already whinging and whining.

Dad (entering during this) ’Ello, Brenda, off out?

Brenda Water’s stopped, Terry, just / going to check across street. (Exits.)

Dad What’s that? The water? Oh. Say, you paid up this month, Jim?

Jim Ay.

Dad There you are, Mark. Forty-one payments left. Ho-ho. Forty-one, not bad, eh. Jim, filled in your log sheets from yesterday? Little trick of trade, Mark, listen to this. If ever there’d be a, a, a what’s-it, Jim? Patrol up ahead, like. Ministry of Transport lot, pull you over, check your log sheets, make sure you’re not fiddling. Well, say sheets, it’s all books now in’t it. If there’s a patrol up ahead, the other lorries what pass by you, coming other way, they warn you wi’ a secret signal. Flash of the lights, sometimes wave of their log book out window. Gi’ you a chance to pull over and correct, like. Course, you’re not doing owt wrong really, just trying to get in as many hours as you can, for t’ company. And remember to do same for other drivers.

Dad checks around Mam’s seat. Beat. He makes to go towards the kitchen.

Jim All right?

Dad Yeah, no bother. Just . . . (Ooh ay, no water.) Erm . . . (Comes back and grabs the polish, spraying as he talks, mainly around Mam.) Yep, forty-one. You know, Mark, your great granddad, Thomas, my dad Charlie’s dad, he started it off, o’ course. 1870s, we’re talking Victorian times, no motor cars course, he were a coach driver. Used to call ’em a ‘coach and four’, ’cause number of horses, and he’d work all up Cottingham and Beverley, even as far as York. ’Cause apart from the trains, that’d be only way to get round, see. But most of running about he’d do were for aristocrats, like, in their big houses. Very skilled job, it were. Highly skilled men. When you think of the roads, nowt like what we have now, dirt tracks practically. Highly skilled. And then your granddad, my dad, worked at Ma Brown’s after war, they still going, oldest in Hull. Though they drive Atkinsons. Quite slow, you know. Good truck, though.

Brenda enters through the front door, holding a large, wide tin tub.

Brenda Over the road’s fine, it’s just this side. Must be our pipes or something.

Dad Working over the street, is it? Oh.

Brenda Here, Mark. Have to get yersen clean in that. Jean says we can ferry buckets across from hers, hot water. Fill that up, get cloth, what have you.

Mark What, down here? Can’t we just fill up the bath?

Brenda Oy, you can carry all them buckets upstairs if you want, I’ve got a shift starting half an hour and quite frankly you’re getting on my last nerve, all right? Now come on, grab a bucket from outside.

Mark Oh fuck’s sake, this / day just gets –

Brenda / Jim Mark!

Mark I’m coming!

Brenda and Mark exit, dog barking. Dad eats an apple with a knife from his pocket

Dad Eh up, it’s like back at Ryde Street, wi’ bath. Remember? Unplumbed. That were all lugging jugs of water to and fro from t’ tap outside. Mind, that were on bottom floor, but still, pain in t’ arse still by today’s standards. And lavvy in back yard an’ all.

Jim plugs in the Christmas lights for the tree and gets a shock.

Jim Ow, yer . . . (bastard) . . .

Dad Huh. Gerra shock, did yer? ’Bout ten year old them. Best thing to wiggle wire around.

Jim tentatively holds the wire and wiggles it around. The lights come on and off. Dad notices something and goes into the kitchen, returning to spray polish.

Jim What you doing wi’ that?

Dad Nowt, just gerrin t’ place fresh, aren’t I? (Puts the polish down. Eats. Watches Jim decorating. Serious, now.) Ay up. Jim. Lovely missus you’ve got there, yes? I’ve always liked her. You know that. But just so you know. I’m not having her cross any picket line, you hear? Nurses. Police. Teachers. Gritters. Postmen. Bloody sandwich-makers. Buggering stamp-lickers. General Strike means General Strike. One out, all out. Don’t want no one from my house breaking that pact. It’s sacred Jim –

Brenda and Mark return with buckets of water, and fill up the tin tub.

Brenda Here we are, God bless Jean. Got some lovely neighbours, Terry. Phew! Whiff of polish in here. (Pours water.) There, Mark. Get yersen washed.

Mark What? Wi’ you lot here?

Brenda Why, you’re only stripping down to your jeans, aren’t you?

Mark I need a . . . Like a, you know, ‘proper’ wash. Everywhere. Wanna / go out tonight.

Brenda Looking nice in here, Jim. Nice, eh, Terry? Very festive.

Mark (looking at the tub) Is this clean?

Dad Course it is. Only used to keep spuds in.

Brenda (going to check Mam) What do you reckon, Val? Nice and Christmassy, eh?

Dad tries to intercept Brenda from Mam. Mark fetches some soap and a towel from the kitchen and begins undressing from the waist up.

Dad Eh, I think she’s probably a bit tired, Bren. You know. Best leaving her, really.

Mam groans as she’s touched and moved.

Brenda (feeling around her) All right, Val? Bit uncomfortable?

Dad Nah, she’s . . .

Brenda (beat) She’s had another accident. (Pause. Looks at Dad.) Say, she’s had another little accident, Terry. Soiled herself.

Dad Has she? Oh?

Brenda Keeps happening, dun’t it. Need to make sure we keep her clean, Terry, it’s . . . it’s not healthy. It’s . . . (Looks at Jim, sighs, walks away.) It’s not bloody fair, it . . .

Brenda stands alone. Her back turned, hand on her forehead. Deep breath.

Brenda Right, well, let’s try and get a bath going, eh? See how far Jean’s courtesy will stretch. You two, grab a bucket and follow me. There you are, Mark, bit of privacy.

Dad We goin’ over t’ road?

Brenda Not be long, Valerie. Just gonna sort you a bath out.

She exits, followed by Dad. Jim watches Mam, then leaves. Mark starts getting undressed – socks, jeans, pants – covering his privates with his hands, self conscious of Mam. He gets in the tub and sits down in the water – yelping, as he brings up a potato. He tosses it aside and grabs the soap, watching Mam.

Mam begins to rock her head forward, like she’s trying to cough. Slight at first. . .

Mark (pause; watching) All right, there, Nana?

Mam (becoming more violent, almost like she’s choking) Mmm . . . mmm . . .

Mark Nan?

She is sick over herself, her head lolling around.

Mark Awh . . . shit. (Erm . . . Shit.) Nan? (Fuck.)

He stands, covering his privates, and steps tentatively over. Brenda returns. Mark dashes back to the tub and gets in.

Brenda Haven’t got time for this, them bloody nattering/away –

Mark Mum!

Brenda They can do it themselves – what? Oh, grow up, Mark, I’ve seen / it all before.

Mark Nan’s been sick.

Brenda Eh? (Looks. Beat.) Val? All right, ducky? What’s happened here then? (Shit.)

She fetches Mark’s towel. He makes to stand before remembering he’s naked.

Mark (splashing back down) Mam, me towel!

Brenda Oh, gi’over, Mark, for pity’s . . . (Cleans Mam, stroking her forehead.) Oh dear, Val, what we gonna do? Running a right temperature. And . . . (Covers her nose.) (Oh God, absolutely . . .) (Pause. Angry now.) For God’s . . . Sorry, Val, you . . . Right, that’s it.

Jim and Dad return with buckets of water, in mid-conversation.

Dad . . . moved in after what’s-it died, and she took off to live / wi’ her daughter.

Brenda Jim, I don’t think your mother –

Dad Banbury, somewhere. (Sees Mam.) What’s happened?

All right, Val? / Oh dear.

Brenda She’s been sick and she’s, she’s running an awful temperature. I don’t think –

Dad Eh, dear, let’s take a look then, shall we? What / you like, eh, Val?

Brenda Jim, I’d like to get her checked up.

Dad Aw. No, Bren, listen, she’s just under the weather. Time of year, in’t it. Hull fair –

Brenda Terry, I’m being serious. I know what I’m talking about!

Jim All right, Bren. Calm down.

Brenda WOULD YOU BLOODY LOOK AT HER, JIM!

Pause. Dad tries to lift her.

Dad All right, OK, let’s . . . get you cleaned . . . (Smells.) Whoof –

He recoils away, grabs the polish and sprays. Brenda snatches it from him.

Brenda Terry, you can’t just keep bloody spraying, right?! / She needs help.

Dad What you doing?!

Brenda You both need a break. OK?

Mark (standing, covering himself) Mam, would you stay over there – !

Brenda Oh Mark, give it a rest!

Mark sits back down again.

Dad No, I know your game, she goes in there and they, they take a look at her, hospital, and they say . . . (Struggling.) What? Tell me I’m doing a bad job? That I . . . I can’t . . .

Brenda Terry, no. It’s no reflection / on you –

Dad That I can’t look after me own wife . . . ?

Jim (pause) Dad, no. Brenda / don’t mean –

Brenda Terry, it’s such a hard job. And you have done . . . You have done an absolutely marvellous job, lookin’ after her. It’s just about giving you, giving you both a rest. Even just a couple of weeks. Get her back in shape. Clean, eating. You back, and . . . and fighting fit, and . . . then. New Year.

We’ll see, eh?

Dad (Fine for years, just me an’ . . .) It’s, this is . . . Look. Let’s just, eh, come on, Val. Let’s just clean you up, have a bath. Warm them cockles? Then see. (Starts lifting her.)

Jim Careful, / Dad.

Brenda Terry.

Mam Yammamama . . . / whatyer dana wi’ me.

Dad All right, there we go.

Jim and Brenda reluctantly help Mam up with Dad’s momentum as he begins leading her too quickly.

Brenda / Whoa, watch it, yeah? Just calm down.

Mark / Granddad, careful? You’re –

Dad Same thing happened to your dad, Val. Remember? Don’t want one of them places.

Jim All right, / Dad, go easy . . .

Dad (wobbling) Whoop, mind yersen.

Mark (standing, covering himself) Shit.

Dad Ay up, like a bit of dance, we’re having, eh? Like t’ good old days, Val.

Brenda Jim! Would you / say something? Terry?

Dad (singing)

‘Who’s taking you home tonight? After the dance – ’

He-mock dances with Mam, laughing. They tumble and fall, hitting the ground.

Brenda / Terry!

Jim / Dad, watch it!

Mark / Fuckin hell . . .

Dad (short, sharp, groans) Aaah . . . aah . . .

Jim and Brenda go to Mam, Jim checking on Dad. Mark puts his pants on.

Brenda Val? / Val, love?

Jim All right? Dad?

Brenda You’re all right, Val. You’re OK. / Just . . . let’s get you up slow.

Jim (helping Dad) Careful, / watch yersen.

Dad I’m all right! (I’m all right.) See to you mother.

Brenda (lifting with Jim) Up we get, there we are. (’S OK. ’S all right.)

They help Mam into her chair. Brenda checks Mam. Mark wraps the towel round himself and goes to Dad, as he slowly eases himself up and wanders round for a bit.

Dad (to Mark) I’m right! Just . . . gi’ me a sec.

Brenda Bit of a tumble, eh, Val? (Pause.) All right, Terry? (Pause.) Nowt serious?

Dad . . . Val right?

Brenda Little knock, nowt . . . (Sighs.) I dunno, Terry. She . . . she needs to get checked out. Needs to be . . . to be looked after properly. For a bit.

Dad . . .

Brenda Terry, you’ve looked after her all by yersen, for so long. But she’s just . . . it’s gone beyond a one-man job. And it in’t your age. I couldn’t do it. Jim couldn’t. Do you understand? It in’t letting her down. (Pause.) So what d’you reckon? Give it a go, eh?

Long pause, Dad looking at the ground. Nods his hea.

Brenda Yes?

Pause. Dad nods his head.

Brenda OK. Jim?

Jim . . .

Brenda Jim?

Jim touches Mam’s shoulder and turns away. Holds his head with his hands, and moans. After a while. . . he nods his head.

Brenda (softly) OK. We’ll get her to hospital, I’ll drive. Once she’s settled, maybe have a drive out to that place, yeah? See if we think it’s OK. Just for now. Take it day by day. Step at a time. See how we go?

Dad (nods his head; pause) I’ll, I’ll get some stu – I’ll get some stuff together, Bren, just . . . (Goes to Mam, brushes her hair.) Just going for a trip down the shops, Val, we’re . . .

He leaves hastily, up the stairs. Silence. Brenda looks at Mark.

Brenda You OK?

Mark nods his head. Beat. Shakes his head. Starts to cry.

Brenda Come here. (Holds him.) Shh. Know it’s not easy, is it? Seeing your nan and your granddad like that. (’S all right, don’t worry.)

She kisses Mark. Makes to leave, touching Jim on the arm.

Brenda It’s Kingston General, not Infirmary, Jim. I’ll get car ready . . .

She exits. Jim and Mark alone. Dad comes down the stairs with a small bag.

Dad Say, Jim, reckon we try Walton Street, then / up Chanterlands . . .

Jim No, it’s General, Dad. If we . . . Spring Bank closed / so maybe best Anlaby into town –

Dad Oh. Still. Cut across Westbourne then onto / Prince’s Ave –

Jim I reckon just heading up Ferensway best . . . Dad . . .

Dad Uh, here, Val. Toothbrush and stuff, little mirror you’ve got. Bits and bobs, eh.

He takes out a hairbrush and combs Mam’s hair. Brenda returns, pushing in a fold-out wheelchair, which she begins to prepare.

Brenda Here we are. Get her out easier with this, not we?

Dad (beat) Had it just in case, did yer?

Brenda (pause) Jim, can yer give us an hand, lifting yer mam. (Starting to lift.)

Dad (lifting) All right, Val. Just going for a little run out. Nice day, eh?

Brenda Watch her feet on them, Terry. Make sure she don’t gerrem caught. There we go.

Dad Cor, still got some weight on you, eh, Val? Taking three of us, lift you.

Brenda That’s right, Val. Whow. Like a weigh-in for the big fight.

Mark Superwoman.

Dad Hard as rock, still, eh? Phoaw. Like t’ Queen Mum. Arms of steel. Grrr.

Brenda (laughs) Eh, tell ’em, Val. Flattery get you nowhere.

Mark Like Maggie, eh?

Dad Eh?

Mark Iron Lady, in’t it? Tough / and strong.

Dad What. What’s yer . . . Iron what? / ’S he on about, Jim?

Brenda (starting to push) All right, Val, / off we go. Nice ride out, eh? Get you sorted.

Mark Have you running the country, Nana.

Dad What’s he . . . what you on wi’, lad? Eh? I, I mean, what’s he – what you on about?!

Mark Nowt, just . . . Nana, like you’re saying. Tough woman. Iron Lady –

Dad grabs Mark by the neck and yanks him to the floor. Brenda yells and goes to him. Dad pushes Mark’s head into the tub of water and holds it down.

Brenda Oy, Terry! Jim! Do summat!

Jim stands back. Brenda pulls Dad off, but Dad manages to flip the tub of water on Mark, who stumbles away, towel around him shivering. Pause. Heavy breathing.

Dad None of that, right! None of that, hear? On wi’ bloody . . . what yer . . .

Pause. They catch their breath. Dad goes to Mam and wheels her out, exiting.

Brenda Mark? You –?

Mark nods his head.

Brenda looks at Jim, and exits. Silence. Jim grabs Mark, sits him at the table.

Jim Why?! Bloody . . . always! ALWAYS! If there’s a cage to rattle, you have to bloody . . . or . . . ! (Sighs. Sits. Calmer.) Stuff what comes out your mouth, I . . . like . . . I can’t . . .

Mark (head down, shivering) (Sorry) . . .

Jim It’s like you want him to . . . like you’re trying to bloody . . . (Catching his breath. Beat.) Like that Shakespeare stuff, yer . . . why? What’s . . . where that come fr – (Sighs.)

Mark (pause; exhausted, quiet) Just. Reading, in’t it.

Jim (pause) I mean, what’s . . . why? Tell me. What’s so . . . what’s that about?

Mark (shrugs) ’S just these. Sons. Of a king. Fight for the throne. After he dies. (Shrugs.) Just like reading. And. Writing. ’S all. Dunno . . .

Jim Writing, what d’ ya . . . ? (Pause.) What do you mean, writing? What? Stories, or . . .

Mark (pause, shrugs) Like. Songs. And . . .

Jim You . . . ? (Pause. Shifts about. Watches Mark, confused.) You . . . write songs?

Pause. Mark shrugs.

Jim (long pause) Well, that’s . . . I thought you just . . . (Pause.) But do you see what I mean, Mark, when yer . . . When I’m trying to keep it all to . . . (Pause. He watches Mark some more.) I din’t, I din’t know you . . . (Pause.) Well why don’t you – you should. Play one. Then. Or . . . I’d . . . you should . . . (Offering him the guitar.) Play one.

Pause. Mark shakes his head.

Jim (pause) I can’t, I think that’s . . . that you can . . . Where do them ideas come . . .

Pause. Mark takes the guitar, slowly. Rests it on his lap. Beat.

Mark (upset) I don’t want to . . .

Jim (pause) Well I think that’s magic, that. I do. I think that’s magic.

The main light and the Christmas tree lights begin to flicker on and off.

Blackout.





Act Two




Scene One


Mark is perched on a high stool, tuning his guitar. He adjusts the height of the microphone. Speaks out to the audience. He is charmingly relaxed, and at ease.

Mark All right? Thank you for. Coming. Just . . . (Tuning his guitar.)

(To audience members coming in,) ’S all right, come in, sit down. Not started yet.

(Tuning. Tests the mic.) One, two, one, two. Can yer hear that? (More strumming.)

All right. Ladies, gents. Hello. Ta for . . . coming back. Main event up next, I’m just, um . . . I’ve got to try and warm you up. Which is, given bloody temperature, near but impossible. Huh. Come round our house, icicles hanging off gas fire. Not even lying. Any you lot got folk on strike? (Looks around.) Yeah? Bit mad, in’t it? Anyone from Hessle in tonight? (Waits.) No, I’d stay quiet an’ all. Any way.

(Clears his throat.) Uh, right, this . . . uh, something I’ve been working on, so . . . go easy, yeah? Erm. Basically, not, not to apologise for it, like, but what wi’ lights going on and off and gloves on your hands, what have you, it’s not quite as . . . (tunes) quite as ready as I’d have liked, but . . . it is what it is, so . . .

He begins to play the opening bars of his song. He stops. Pause. Less at ease. . .

Actually, sorry, do you know what . . . (Pause.) I . . . (Pause.) How about this?

(Plays. Sings)

‘There was a young man from . . . ’ (Laughs.)

Nah, only. Joking. Erm. (Pause.) Man walks into t’ doctors wi’ a strawberry on his head. (More tuning. . .) Says, ‘Yer got any cream for this?’

Christmas crackers, eh? Bloody . . . um, any road, how about one from, uh . . . well, I think, one of the most beautiful women in the world, Ms Patti Smith. Rock on, erm . . . and, uh, it’s, just to say, feels a bit mad me being here ’cause, uh . . . me granddad and grandma, they used to do the rounds. Singing. Round here, so . . . all a bit mad. Erm. Anyway. Patti Smith. ‘Elegies’.

(Plays. Singing.)

‘I just don’t know what to do tonight,

My head is aching as I drink and breathe

Memory falls like cream in my bones, moving on my own.’

Christmas lights, over in the darkness of the living room, begin to flicker on and off. The faint, tinny sound of Vera Lynn’s ‘The Love Bug Will Bite You’ emerges, upbeat and jazzy. Mark notices, but carries on. . .

‘There must be something I can dream tonight,

The air is filled with the moves of you,

All the fire is frozen yet still I have the will, ooh, ah.’

Dad hops on into the semi-darkness of the living room, lighting candles, humming along. The song too loud now, Mark, stops, stands and leaves. The main lights in the room flicker on. Dad smiles, blows out the candles and exits. The music fades.

‘Day of Action’: 22 January 1979. Afternoon. Jim enters from outside in full winter garb, snow about him. He stamps his feet and leans a placard against the wall, closes the door and stamps his feet. Brenda can be heard slamming about in the kitchen. Jim notices the Christmas decorations gathering around him.

Jim (Oh gawd, what’s he doin’?) Bren!

Brenda enters, wearing an apron, and a face of thunder.

Jim What you gorra face like a wet weekend for?

Brenda You think this is funny?

Jim No, Bren. I don’t.

Brenda Christmas dinner on Christmas Day, I bloody hate. Christmas dinner when it in’t even sodding Christmas makes me want to stab someone, Jim. And I’m not talking wi’ a sharp knife, I’m talking like a rolling pin. Blunt, and slow. Not that / there’s a sharp knife that whole kitchen.

Jim All right, Bren, I get the picture.

Brenda And when I can’t get hold of food and the lights keep dying and the bloody gas and the bloody water take it in turns to decide not to work –

Jim Right. Where’s Mark?

Brenda Are you listening?

Jim Yes. Where is he?

Brenda Jim!

Jim BREN! . . . (About to launch into something, but stops.)

Brenda Upstairs. His exam tomorrow. Well. ‘One assumes.’ Wi’ no teachers teaching, not exactly been best week for him. And I’m not sure what your father thinks he’s doing, locked in the room, but quite frankly if he finds out, he’d prefer him to be doing what he thought he were doing.

Jim Ay, well.

Brenda ’S it like outside?

Jim Mad. Nowt’s working. Roads are a nightmare.

Brenda Well, gritters are on strike, aren’t thee. (Like every bloody . . .)

Jim (wafting the air) How long’s that rubbish been out now? Starting to . . .

Brenda Two weeks. Move it away from t’ door if you want, got hands, an’t yer?

Jim (sighs, chucking his car keys down) That’s last of t’ petrol.

Brenda Eh?

Jim Car died.

Brenda You gerrit home?

Jim Couple streets away. Managed to pull up on t’ pavement at least. (Sits to take off his boots.) Good job they’re bringing her, otherwise . . .

Brenda It in’t a good job, Jim, it in’t / a good job at all –

Jim I know – Bren, I know. That’s not what I . . . (Looks about and sighs.) Dear, dear. Didn’t think he’d actually put decorations back up. (Touches the Christmas tree lights, gets a shock.) OUCH! Yer . . . bastard . . .

Brenda All right? (Making for the kitchen.) Better get back to it.

Jim What meat we havin’?

Brenda Nowt at moment.

Jim Eh?

Brenda Nowt at moment. You dad’s gone out to try and find something.

Jim Find something? What do you mean?

Brenda Shop. Neighbours. Lost child wandering the street.

Jim Can’t have veg on Christmas dinner wi’ no meat.

Brenda Makes you think you’re getting veg? And it in’t bloody Christmas.

She exits back into the kitchen. The Christmas tree lights flicker off again. Jim waggles the wire and gets another shock. Blackout.

Dad enters a spot as the music returns, singing ‘The Love Bug Will Bite You’.

Dad

‘Listen all you people, you better beware,

Love’s an epidemic, and it’s in the air,

It’s a thing that gets you even though you’re very smart,

So take some good advice and go and vaccinate your heart.’

Mam enters a spot at her mic, continuing the song.

Mam

‘The love bug will bite you if you don’t watch out,

If he ever bites then you’ll sing and shout, you’ll go – ’

Dad mimes the short solo with an imaginary trumpet.

Mam

‘That’s what love is all about.’

The living room lights up again. Jim enters, trying to start a fire in the fireplace.

Mam

‘You can’t eat, you can’t sleep, you’ll go crazy.

You’ll just lardi-dardi-dah all day.

If someone wants to know why you’re crazy,

You’ll answer – ’

Dad (Gibberish.)

Mam

‘The love bug will bite you if you don’t watch out,

If he ever bites then you’ll sing and shout, you’ll go – ’

Dad mimes the short solo with an imaginary trumpet.

Mam

‘That’s what love is all about.’

Dad and Mam jitterbug. In the living room, Brenda lays the table in a strop.

Dad

‘You can’t eat, you can’t sleep, you’ll go crazy.

You’ll just lardi-dardi-dardi all day.

If someone wants to know why you’re crazy,

You’ll answer – ’ (Gibberish.)

Dad / Mam

‘The love bug will bite you if you don’t watch out,

If he ever bites then you’ll sing and shout, (Gibberish.)

That’s what love is all about.’

The music comes to an end. Dad and Mam kiss, and disappear.

Mark comes stomping down the stairs with a book.

Mark Fuck’s sake. Heating’s off again.

Jim Need chuck more stuff on t’ fire.

Mark Well that’s no good for me upstairs, is it? Time’s she back?

Brenda Half an hour or so, home phoned. Surprised anyone’s available to bring her. See? He dun’t mind folk at the Home turning up to work, crossing t’ picket line, does he, oh no. But a nurse, at a hospital, with / patients, well . . .

Jim I know, Bren. It’s just today. It’s a national Day of Action, for fu – for pity’s sake. Mam coming home anyway, can’t we just keep him / happy –

Brenda She shouldn’t be coming home, Jim. / After all that –

Jim I know! Look! It . . . Home’s not good enough, there’s / staff on strike, things breaking –

Brenda Home is good enough. This home in’t good enough, he’s just trying to find fault. All that trouble and pain and gerrin over it and now we’re back to / square one.

Jim What do you want me to do? Eh?! Money’s run out, / there’s nothing –

Brenda And why has the bloody money run out? Is it because folk like him intimidate folk like you to stop working?

Jim Jesus, Bre – One out, all out, for fuck’s sake. Otherwise it / doesn’t bloody work.

Brenda It is different for us, Jim, our situation / is different.

Jim We all deserve better pay, Bren! Ever heard of a thing called socialism?! Bloody –

Brenda Don’t you bloody socialism me! All right! Don’t you bloody dare! Where is it that you think I work, Jim, where? Place where whether you’re rich, bloody poor, male, female, union or a pissing strike-breaker, you bleed the bloody same, die the bloody same. On about socialism, writing it on your little placards as a slogan. Right? I bloody know what it is. What you will have to explain to me is what that’s got to do wi’ standing on someone’s neck, shouting, ‘You will be free, you bugger, / or else.’

Jim Right, OK, ta for that party political broadcast from the Brenda party. When’s dinner?

Brenda You’re only not working yersen cause of what he might say.

Jim Bren.

Mark You don’t even believe in it, Dad, so why / don’t you . . .

Jim What? (Pause.) What did you just say?

Brenda Jim.

Jim What did you just say?! Come here!

Mark Well do you? Just ’cause Granddad does, / dun’t mean –

Jim And who you, eh? Big man. Say summat like that to / me? Who are you?

Brenda Oh Jim, please, let’s just get through today.

Jim What do you want me to do, eh?! You two?! Bloody laughing at me one day, ‘Urgh, missed fucking bus, kind of activist are you, ner-ner-ner.’ I’m just trying to do what’s best. And trying to keep him happy, right? What do you want me to do?

Mark (sighs) Can’t be down here long, Mam, you know, I’ve got –

Jim You’ll be down as long as your granddad wants you.

Mark Dad! Do you want me to fail? For some stupid . . .

Jim It’s Christmas, Mark.

Mark It’s the 22nd of January!

Jim It’s Christmas for your nan! Look! / I know it in’t . . .

Brenda If Mark needs to go upstairs and study he needs to study –

Mark / Thank you.

Jim He’s not –

Mark Can’t we make summat up, I dunno, like I’ve to go out, factory have called me in.

Jim Oh yeah, strike-breaker, that’ll make him even happier.

Mark Well, I’m not staying down here / all night!

Jim LOOK! (Pause. Calmer.) Look. Can we . . . can we just keep him happy? For now. For one day. All right? This is what he wants. This is his house. We’re his family.

Mark (Yeah, we’re your family an’ all, but . . .)

Jim Eh?

Mark Nowt.

Jim EH?!

Dog barks outside. Dad enters, holding a plate wrapped in paper.

Dad All right, Jim. Here you go, Brenda. Bits of chicken, already cooked. See?

Brenda (taking it) Already cooked, where from?

Dad Jean, yesterday’s Sunday roast. Wrapped it up, out of habit, for t’ boy’s sandwiches, like, forgetting they’d not be working. Already cooked, just needs warming up.

Brenda Right. Thank you.

Dad Been up at docks, Jim? Pwoar, bet it were what’s it, charged today, eh? Busy?

Jim Yes, Dad, very.

Dad Nowt open, you know Bren. Everywhere closed, hardly anyone about. Million they reckon, today. Maybe million and a half. Tools down. Incredible.

Brenda I know. Emergency’s only at Infirmary. (Exits into kitchen.) ’Ever that means.

Dad (stoking the fire, chucking some kindling on) Brrr. Bit on the chilly side, eh? All right there, Mark lad? (Seeing the book.) What’s that?

Mark Nowt. Just. Found it.

Dad Well, let’s have it, then.

He takes the book from Mark and tosses it on to the fire. Mark stares open-mouthed, watching it burn, as Dad arranges two table chairs next to each other.

Dad (sitting) Come on, then, lad. Lesson time. Let’s see what you know.

Mark Yer what?

Dad Come on, got to keep your brain in gear, what wi’ pumps empty, you don’t want to get out of practice, do you? Come on, climb into cab. Close door, bloody freezing.

Mark wanders over and sits.

Dad Right. (Miming.) Seat belt on. Click. Come on.

Mark mimes, unenthusiastic.

Dad Check your mirrors are all set. Oop, mine’s a bit off, unclick, window down, lean out. There, better. Window up. Seat belt on. Click. Yours OK?

Mark Yep.

Dad You sure?

Mark Yep.

Dad Right. ‘All right, Aggie, how do? Had a good sleep?’ (Laughs.) Engine on then.

Mark ‘turns the engine on’.

Dad Come on, lad, ABC, accelerator, brake, clutch. You’ve got one on brake and one dangling bloody nowhere. Right. What gear you in?

Mark Dunno. Gear stick’s invisible.

Dad Well, come on then, bloody dawdling. Pull away. Gently. OK. How fast we going?

Mark Not very?

Dad Is that because handbrake’s on?

Mark Oh yeah. (‘Lifts handbrake’.)

Dad Right, gently. Gently. OK, stop at main road. Handbrake back on, always just in case. These things are so heavy you’ll roll uphill. Now. Which way we going?

Mark Dunno. Wherever.

Dad North, south, east, west? See, that were the thing wi’ me. I were what’s called a tramper. Every drop somewhere new, every day summat different. Your dad, he’s a trunker. Same drops roughly week on week, couple of monthly jobs. Course, I grant you, different wi’ me, your grandmother were at home looking after the boys, whereas your mam, she works. In fact it were your nan what looked after you, lot of the time, while your mam . . . well, anyway. Like I say, sometimes you’d be out for days, stuck places waiting for a return load, see. ’Cause empty trucks on the road, well, they’re not earning any money, are thee. But you’d get to know other folk who’d kip at truck stops. And bed and breakfasts like. (Laughs.) And I’m telling you, some of these landladies. Notorious, thee were. No-torious. Doncaster Donna. Big Guns Bradford. Polly ‘Poke’ in Stoke. (Laughs.) Course sometimes, and I don’t advise you this, but you’d try and make it home, rather than stay over anywhere. Meant the odd fiddle of yer log sheets. Well, you have books now, but . . . you know, you’d learn tricks. Just got to try and keep awake, you know. Hot flask of something. Window down. One time I had this CB radio thing. Course your dad’s put one of them cassette things in Aggie now. Though Lord only knows what he listens to. Anyhow. You keep at it, son. Not long now. Forty-one!

Dad laughs and stands. He fiddles with a video recorder and TV as Brenda enters.

Brenda Mark, help me set the table.

Dad Ay up, works a treat, this video what’s-it. Got everything on she’ll have missed. First video recorder on Hessle Road, when Bill gorrit. Din’t reckon much to at time, like but . . . ’Specially if she missed it. (Watching Brenda.) Eh, I . . . I am awful grateful, you know, Bren. I, I, I know it’s a bit of a pain in the arse, nuther Christmas dinner, all that, but . . . I just, she would have so enjoyed it, like, and . . . well, / you know –

Brenda You’re . . . you’re all right, Terry. It’s . . . (Taking some rubbish outside.) ’S all right.

Dad Eh you must be chuffed though, Mark, second Christmas. Cor! Every boy’s dream.

Brenda (popping her head round the front door) She’s here. Van’s pulled up (Exiting.)

Dad Whup! Right-ho.

Dad exits. Mark puts crackers out on the table. Noise of doors slamming, Dad greeting Mam outside. ‘Thanks’ to the driver. After a bit, Mam is wheeled in.

Dad Here we are, Val, eh?! Home sweet home.

They look at Mam. She’s gaunt and weaker than last we saw her, oblivious to where she is, head to one side, eyes half closed. Behind Dad, Brenda shoots Jim a look.

Dad (looking for a response) Well, here she is. Jim, say hello.

Jim . . .

Mark (unsure) Hello, Nana. You all right?

Dad Come on, let’s get you in, then. And look. Decorations are still up and everything. And table set. We’re gonna have another Christmas Day, Val, ’cause you missed the last one, din’t you? Well, part from one you had in there but it wan’t proper, were it, not how you like it, any road. Here we are. (Wheels her to the table.) There. Nice bit of chicken, Brenda’s got, some veg. Lovely.

Dad hops to the video recorder while Brenda and Mark plate up. Jim watches. Brenda looks Mam over while Dad is distracted before going back in the kitchen.

Dad Ay up an’all, look at this, Val. Twentieth century now, whey-hey! Gorra video recorder, tape programmes what we like. First video player on Hessle Road when he got it. First one. Taped the Queen’s speech for you Val, ’cause I know we always like that, don’t we? Good one this year. That’s all on tape. Watch that. Eh, crikey, it’s a year and a half since jubilee, in’t it? God! (Clapping his hands.) Remember that? (Rearranging her clothes, straightening her out.) Out on the street. You remember that, Jim? Christ, never seen owt like it, streams of flags going from house to house, zig-zagging down the street. We’ve gorra plate, an’t we, wi’ that on? Scullery, somewhere. Eh, ’ark at me calling it scullery. Kitchen. (Calling.) Brenda? (Back to Mam.) Victoria sponge, that were yourn, oh my God, people were licking their lips for days, bloody days.

(Laughs.) Which you renamed Elizabeth Sponge, remember? And that’s . . . hold on, am I right, or . . . yeah, that’s right, in’t it? Thinking I were gerrin mixed up over VE Day then. Remember that, Val? Eeh, dear, some good parties though, we’ve had, eh? Can’t believe . . . I can’t believe just last Christmas you were . . . you know, up and . . . doing, erm . . .

(Singing)

‘I’m dreaming, of a white Christmas,

Just like the ones I used to know . . .’

Brenda (laying some veg, sighing) All right, it isn’t much, but here we are, tuck in.

Dad Whey. Grub’s up. Ta, Bren, thanks so much. / Look at this, eh, Val?

Jim Looks lovely, Bren.

Mark Ta, Mam.

Brenda Well, it’s turnips ’stead of parsnips and it’s Aunt Bessies, not me own, but / you’ve got your cauliflower and what-not . . .

Dad Ay up, / nowt wrong wi’ Aunt Bessies. Yorkshire gal, any road.

Jim ’S fine, Bren, honestly. Thank you.

Brenda Oh. Gravy. (Exiting to the kitchen.)

Dad Eh, and crackers as well. Crackers, Val. These new? These new, Bren, or ones we had?

Brenda (coming back in) No, new ones, one of the few things that were easy to find, and half price at that in Jan. Everyone all right, got enough?

Jim Yes, Bren.

Brenda Drink of owt? Water?

Mark Mum, honestly, it’s all fine.

Brenda Right. (Sits.) Sorry / we’ve no wine and that.

Dad (with the cracker) Eh, these are smashing, these. Shall we pull ’em now? Come on, Val, here you are. Everyone get pulling.

He gives his cracker to Mam, holds her hand around it, and pulls. The others watch this awkward manoeuvre.

Dad Whey! There, well done, love. Come on, everyone. Get cracking. Ay up. Cracking!

Brenda Come on though, tuck in eating while we do, it’ll get cold.

Dad laughs and pulls his apart while the others pull crackers between them. Dad puts a paper hat on Mam’s head.

Dad Ah, see. Purple. Your colour, Val.

Brenda What’s the joke, Terry?

Dad Joke?

Brenda In / the cracker.

Mark God, no more. / Please.

Dad Oh. (Searching.)

Mark / One round of shit jokes bad enough.

Brenda Jim, you’ve got one there, an’ all.

Jim doesn’t hear, watching Mam.

Brenda Oy, Jim. There you go. ’Ere Mark, pull this. (Pulls a cracker.) Whup. There we are. Where is it. Oh. Hold on. (Reading.) ‘What do you call a fish with no eyes?’ (Pause.) ‘Fsh’. (Laughs.) Fsh. Like that, Terry?

Dad stands and nips over to fetch back a Christmas card.

Dad Ay up, Val, and look at this. Guess who this is from. Look. (Opens the card.) ‘Merry Christmas, Mam and Dad. Love Johnny and Family, kiss.’ Eh? Nice, in’t it? Look. (Displaying the envelope.) Look at postmark. ‘Telford’. In Telford at the moment, Val. ’S nice there. Nice for the kids and everything. Not even that far away, is it, Jim? M1, A50, A518, job done. Ah, that were really nice of ’em.

Mark Say he’s still with Auntie Jane?

Dad ‘Love Johnny and Family, kiss’. Yeah.

Jim Dun’t say which family.

Dad ‘Love Johnny and Family’, Val. We know who that is, don’t we? Jane and the kids.

Brenda (pause) Come on, we’ve got cracker jokes scattered about table. Let’s hear some more.

Dad Here we go. Let’s read this, Val. Uh . . . (Reading.) ‘One piece of string . . . ’ What’s that?

Brenda (holding out a cracker) ’Ere y’are Jim, may as well use ’em up.

Dad (reading) ‘One piece of string to another: Are you a bow? No. I’m afraid not.’ Don’t get that.

Brenda (laugh) Oh, I like that one. Frayed knot, Terry. Like on a / shoelace.

Mark Don’t worry, Granddad, / they’re never funny.

Dad Like that, Val?

Brenda Ooh Mark, just bloody lighten up, will yer?

Dad Eh, we’ve taped Morecambe and Wise, an’ all. Christmas special. Were a blinder, wan’t it, Jim? Had that / uh, that comedy actor on we like.

Brenda Chicken all right, Mark?

Mark Hmm. Yes, Mam. Thank you.

Dad What were his name / Jim? Comedy actor.

Brenda / Right. Jim, read your joke.

Jim Leonard Rossiter.

Dad / Leonard Rossiter.

Brenda Oh, I’ll just read it. (Reading.) ‘Why did the man get sacked from the orange factory?’

Dad We like him.

Brenda ‘Couldn’t concentrate’.

Mark Eh, that Eric Morecombe looks / a bit like Philip Larkin, you know.

Brenda (No one’s listening.)

Dad Philip . . . ? Oh yeah, poet. From up, erm . . . what’s that one he wrote?

Mark (looking at Jim) ‘They fuck you up, your Mum and Dad’?

Dad (unravelling another joke) No, erm . . . Ooh, look, nuther one here. / ‘What’s the longest word in the English language?’

Jim ’S lovely, Bren. Dinner.

Brenda Well. It in’t lovely, but thanks for . . . / you know . . .

Dad (reading) ‘Smiles. Because there is a mile between the first and last letters.’ Eh?

Brenda Mark. Read that one.

Mark Do I have to?

Brenda / Jim Mark.

The phone rings. Dad stands, goes and answers it. Brenda reaches across the table and holds Mam’s arm. Their dialogue runs hushed under Dad’s on the phone.

Brenda All right, Val? You open your eyes for me, love? Jim, look at her.

Mark She OK?

Brenda Jim, she can’t stay here.

Jim looks at his Mam.

Brenda Jim. God, she’s freezing. Mark, wrap this blanket round her. Jim, have a word, you understand? We’ll have to call ’em, get ’em to pick her back up. (Waits.) Jim?

Dad (overlapping above, answering the phone) Hello?

How do, Sparky, what’s new, how’s tricks, you all right? . . . Do you wanna speak to Jim, or . . . ? Only we’re just eating, Sparks . . . No, we’re all ’ere. Where you calling from? . . . Oh ay. Right . . . You’re joking, never? What time? . . . Well, I’ll tell him but I don’t reckon we’ll be out at all today what wi’ everything. And Val’s just come home an’all, Sparks. From’t nursing home, like . . . Yeah she’s fine. I’ll pass on your . . . yeah . . . All right, well, have fun. Wish I were there. (Laughs,) All right, go well young man, take care. Ta’ra.

He puts the phone down and sits back down at the table, stroking Mam’s hair.

Mark Who were that?

Dad Sparky, from t’ yard. Says they’ve had a call from some of the lads still driving for, erm . . . what’s it, drugs place. Pharmaceuticals, you know. Says they’ve rang ahead, let them know where the drop is, one of them depots out towards the new bridge.

Brenda Phone ahead? Why?

Dad So pickets can come and stop ’em getting in, like. You know. From making the drop.

Brenda Well, if they don’t want to make the drop, why thee working?

Dad Well, it’s sabotage, in’t it? Working from t’ inside. Mark. / What’s your joke?

Brenda It’s so they don’t have to cross picket line but still keep earning. / (Cheeky gits.)

Dad Come on, they’re good, these crackers. / All right, Val. Good grub, eh?

Brenda Maybe Jim / could do that, eh?

Mark No, / Granddad, it’s shit.

Jim Bren.

Brenda Earn a bit of money, ’s been two weeks, and we’re struggling.

Jim Bren.

Dad Not struggling. Mark, go on. Stop being a daft sod. / Read it.

Brenda Not struggling? Terry, we’ve had to / take Val out the home.

Mark (reading) ‘What does a grape do when you – ’

Dad Because it wan’t good enough, Bren.

Mark See, / no one’s listening.

Dad Food and, and not washing her clothes properly, and just the way you / get treated, there. No. Oy, I’m listening, Mark. Read it.

Brenda I’m just saying, if there was a way to stay / on strike and still earn, Terry, then –

Mark ‘What does a grape do when you tread on it?’

Jim Brenda.

Brenda Jim! I’m / trying to find a compromise, here.

Dad Enough, right? Mark? / Finish the frigging joke.

Brenda I think she’d still be better off / there, Terry. I’m talking at someone who –

Mark It’s rubbish / anyway. Can’t we just –

Dad She’s better off here! At home! Mark! What does a grape do when you tread on it?!

Mark ‘Lets out a little wine.’

Dad Thank you!

He eats. Silence. Jim watches Mam.

Dad ’S up, Jim? Get eating.

Jim slowly carries on eating.

Dad (beat, stands) Come on. Gordon Bennett. Meant to be Christmas. Let’s have some festive tunes. Eh, Val? Bit of the old sing-song?

Dad plays ‘Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas’ on the record player. Dad sings along, hopping back to his chair, holding Mam’s hand and prompting her along.

Dad Ho yes, like this one, don’t we?

Mark Ay up, if you want me and Dad to go join that picket, Granddad, I’d be happy to.

Dad No, that’s all right, we’re having our proper Christmas, aren’t we?

Jim Mark, leave it.

Mark I don’t mind. (Eyeballing Jim .) Popping out for a couple hours or so. On My Own.

Dad No, stay where you are, lad. They know what they’re doing.

Mark (pause) Say, new bridge open soon, though. Couple o’ year.

Dad Longest one in the world, it’ll be.

Mark Yeah, just a shame it joins up fuck-all with nowhere.

Brenda Val all right, Terry? She’s shivering.

Dad Yeah, fine, just gerrin used to being somewhere new again, in’t she?

Mark I were reading that, uh . . . it’s so fucking long – sorry – it’s so long. That engineers and what-not have had to take into account the curve of the earth when designing it.

Dad Curve of the earth?! Bloody hell, curve of the earth, Val.

Mark And. This is even better. All the cables that hold it up, like, off them two legs. There’ll be enough cabling there to go round the entire planet, twice.

Dad Go round the entire planet?!

Mark Twice.

Dad Twice?! No wonder it’s cost so bleeding much, eh? Eh, Val? All that money for a bridge. Need more than a pools win to buy that, eh?

Mark That what you spent yourn on, Dad? This new bridge belong to you and Nan?

Dad Oh, don’t bloody let’s get on to that. I don’t want to know. I Don’t Want To Know. (Pause. He eats.) Ay up, just thinking back, Jim. Well you probably can’t remember, just a kid when I got back after t’ war. But parties what happened in the street then. They were a bit like this, ’cause of course, folk couldn’t afford anything then, I mean really anything. Ay up, and that were summer that Labour got in, Mark. Clement Atlee, best government we have ever had! National Health Service, well, you know, Brenda. Care for anyone what needs it – a revolution, it were. Welfare, benefits for those what need it. Free comprehensive education. Nah, that’s real Labour, and don’t you forget it when you cast your first ever vote, kiddo. (Trying to feed Mam.) Come on, Val, ’nuther mouthful, eh?

The lights in the room go out. The music stops. Darkness, bar the fire embers.

Brenda Oh God . . .

Dad / Whoop. Lekkie’s gone.

Mark Jesus.

Dad All right, no bother. Don’t worry, Val, this has been happening regular. Where’s me –

He finds a torch and turns it on, giving more light. He opens the door to check outside. Brenda sets about lighting a few candles around the table and room.

Jim Is it fuse box, reckon?

Dad Nah, whole street’s gone. Eeh dear. (Closing the door.) No bother, light a few candles and we’ll be right, eh? Like Christmas in the olden days, eh, Val? Never off for long, is it Jim? Got to watch our Morecambe and Wise tape later, an’t we?

Mark Just popping upstairs.

Brenda Jim, can you do anything with that fire? Freezing.

Jim goes to stoke the fire as Mark slinks away. Dad tries to feed Mam. She groans.

Brenda (checking her out) Do you know what they were giving her there, pill-wise?

Dad Nah, just stuff to . . . you know, dope her up. Keep her quiet. Bah!

Brenda There’s that spare blanket in our room, I’ll just go and fetch it.

Dad No, she’s fine, Bren. Come on, we haven’t even finished dinner yet. Jim, sit down.

Jim Just gerrin fire going again, Dad.

Dad Fire’s fine, sit. Bren, please. Where’s Mark?

Brenda Think he’s just nipped upstairs, Terry, he weren’t feeling too good.

Dad Eh? What you on wi’? Looked fine to me. (Going to call.) Mark?!

Brenda Jim?

Jim What?

Dad Mark?! Get down here!

Mam groans.

Brenda Oh, Val. ’S all right. Come here. (Strokes her forehead.) I’ll get that blanket.

Dad She – Bren. Leave it. Jim, would you bloody sit?

Mark lollops down the stairs.

Mark What?

Dad What do you mean, bloody what? We’re having Christmas dinner, here. Sit down.

Brenda Terry, do you reckon we should maybe put Val to bed for a bit? She’s exhausted.

Dad What? No –

Brenda And then have a serious think about . . . (Sighs.) About what to do tomorrow.

Dad What to do tomorrow? What tomorrow?

Brenda About taking her back.

Dad Take her back? Take her – she wants to / be here. Val?

Brenda Jim, would you give me a hand?

Dad Stay where / you are, Jim.

Jim stays seated.

Brenda Jim, please.

Dad Brenda! She is my wife.

Mark (standing) Well, if Nana’s going to bed, I’m going upstairs an’ all –

Dad Mark, SIT DOWN! Everyone! Sit Your Fucking Arses DOWN! (Pause.) Brenda.

Brenda (hovering over Mam) Jim.

Dad Don’t Jim, just sit. Right?

Long pause. Brenda goes and sits.

Dad (pause; goes and sits) Meant to be bloody Christmas for Val, and all of you are –

The lights in the room return. The record player fuzzes, the needle on the vinyl.

Dad Oh, that were (’bout bloody) . . . (Sighs.) What’s that noise?

Jim (making to stand) Needle on t’ record player –

Dad Leave it! Just . . . sit . . .

Mam groans.

Dad ’S all right, Val, we’re here. Have another bite. (Tries.) You’re all right . . .

Silence as Dad eats. Jim watches Mam. The fuzzy sound of the needle tripping over the spinning vinyl. Suddenly, Jim stands with haste and goes to stop the record player. He stands facing it for a moment, back turned. He sits back at the table.

They eat. Jim catches Brenda’s eye. He looks at Mam. He looks at Mark. He fiddles around with his cutlery. . . before slowly standing.

Dad What you on wi’, Jim?

Jim is still at the table. Beat. He slowly walks over to some coat hooks and begins slipping on his jacket and boots. Dad stands.

Dad Oy, what you doing, where do you think you’re going?

Jim Going to work . . .

Dad Eh? Work? What work? There is no work! Sit back down.

Jim Going down yard.

Dad You what?

Jim See . . . see if there’s owt doing.

Dad Jim. Sit your arse down now! What’s brought this on?

Jim I’m sorry, Dad.

Dad Don’t be, on about ‘sorry’, just sit.

Jim Mam needs to be in the home, Dad.

Dad She’s in a . . . this – and, that in’t your decision, Jim. It’s mine! She’s, she’s my wife!! And she’s in a home, our home!

Jim I’m / sorry, Dad.

Dad Sit down!

Jim Mark. Go upstairs.

Dad Eh?

Jim Get your work done.

Mark (standing) Dad?

Dad Work, what work? Sit that bony little backside down now, Mark! Jim!

Mark Dad?

Jim Mark’s . . . got work to do, Dad. He’s studying. / He’s got exams.

Dad Studying? What? / What you on wi’?

Mark Dad don’t, you’re right, it in’t time.

Dad What about factory?

Jim There in’t one. And he in’t taking driving lessons, not yet. We just . . . didn’t want to tell you yet. / ’Cause of Mam. I’m sorry.

Mark I’m sorry, Granddad. / (Oh fuck.)

Dad I don’t . . . I can’t . . . Yer what? Just . . . look. Can we . . . why do you have go and, and, and ruin everything? This was meant to be for your mam, so can we just sit down, and then we’ll, we’ll sort it out. (Pause.) What you’re playing at? Sit. (Waits.) You aren’t man of this house, Jim, I am! And she, she is . . . (Struggling.) She is My Wife! You’ve no right. She’s My Wife! Now, SIT!

Jim doesn’t move. Dad grabs him by the back of the neck and pushes him down.

Brenda Jim!

Mark Granddad, don’t! Dad, I’m sorry!

Jim breaks free and stands back up. He can’t look Dad in the face. Dad hits him.

Brenda Terry, no!

Dad Sit down!

Jim tries to stay upright from the blow. Beat. Dad hits him again.

Dad SIT! DOWN!

Jim You’re . . . going wrong way. Dad. Me logbook’s out window. Flashing me lights . . .

Dad And what do you – what would you know, eh?! She ever tell yer? Say owt to you?

Jim No, Dad. That’s point. She never gorra chance. She’s . . . she’s going. . .

Dad What, let you in on all her little secrets, did she? Tell you stuff she never told me? On that fucking ‘day out’ of yourn?! You coming home, grinning.

Jim Dad . . .

Dad Where did you go, eh? What did you do that were so fucking great?! WHAT?!

Jim Just . . . (Sighs. Exhausted.) Blackpool, Dad. We just . . . fancied going across. To Blackpool. Just sat on the beach . . . went to the fair . . . bought an ice cream . . . which we shared . . .

Dad (looks at him) Please . . . sit down . . .

Jim (shakes his head) . . . I can’t . . .

Beat. Dad grabs him, hard, and shoves him over towards the dinner table. Mark and Brenda scream, trying to pull Dad off.

Brenda NO! / What are you doing?!

Mark / Granddad, let go of him! DAD!

Dad You’ll do as you’re bloody told! This is my house!

Brenda Terry! We’re only thinking / of you and Val!

Dad Leave off, Brenda! I’ve had enough!

Brenda / Jim.

Mark Granddad!

Dad She is my wife! / And it’s Christmas!

Brenda Let go of him,/ Terry. Please!

Mark It in’t even fucking Christmas!

He grabs hold of the wires and yanks the Christmas lights from the wall socket. There’s a spark. Brenda screams as the room descends into darkness.

Dad Awh, not again!

Brenda What were that spark?

Jim Mark?

Dad / These flaming lights.

Brenda Mark? Terry, it’s summat else! Where’s your torch?

Jim I’ll gerrit.

Brenda (screaming) Mark! He’s on the floor! Mark! / Can you hear me?

Dad Eh? What’s that?

Jim flicks on the torch. We see Mark lying on the floor. Brenda with him.

Brenda MARK! / Can you hear me, love!

Dad Bloody hell. It’s them flaming lights!

Brenda Don’t touch him, he’s had a shock. Jim, are the phones working?

Jim stumbles over to the phone. Brenda gets Mark into the recovery position.

Brenda (’S all right, Mark. / Just a little shock, we’ll get you sorted.)

Jim / Hello?

Dad Is he all right, Bren?

Jim Hello?! / (Phone down.) There’s no – it in’t working!

Mam groans.

Dad All right, Val, with / you in a sec.

Brenda (stroking his hair) Shh, all right Mark, OK.

Jim (opening the front door) Neighbours have lights on, must just be ours. I’ll run across, call an ambulance –

Brenda No, Jim, they’re not working, they’re all on bloody strike!

Jim Shit!

Jim runs outside. We hear him screaming for help. Mark starts having a fit, body shaking violently, vomiting from the mouth. Brenda tries to hold him.

Brenda Oh God. Mark?

Dad ’S up? / What’s he doing?

Brenda Mark? Can you hear me, love? It’s all right. It’s all right. I’ve got you . . . (Shh . . .)

Dad All that lovely dinner, Bren. All that lovely dinner . . .

Mark’s fit eases, and stops. Brenda holds him, stroking his hair. . .

Brenda (softly) Shh. ’S OK. You’re gonna be fine. Dad’s gone to get some help. Shh. Look at your hair, eh. All spikey, at last. Look at that. All punk rocker, like you’ve wanted.

Jim bursts back in, and goes to pick Mark up.

Jim Fuck it, look, I’ll just carry him, we’ll walk!

Brenda Jim, no, let’s / knock on other –

Jim It’s only ten minutes, I can do it.

Brenda He’s just been / fitting, Jim . . .

Dad All right, need a hand?

Jim (lifting him) Eeh dear, there we go, Mark. There we are. God, light as a feather, aren’t you . . . (Light as a feather . . .)

Dad What shall . . . (Struggling.) I’m awful s-sorry, Jim, I . . .

Jim Just ge’orr, Dad, will you?! I’ve had enough!

Dad I was . . . / only trying to . . .

Jim Look at what you’ve done, you daft old . . .

Brenda Jim.

Jim kicks his Dad in the leg while holding Mark. Dad stumbles a bit.

Dad I’m . . . sorry . . .

Jim THIS IS MY SON LYING HERE! IT’S MY SON . . .

He weeps. Dad watches. Brenda leads him away.

Brenda Come on . . . we’ve got to go. Just wait here, Terry, we’ll . . . Just wait here.

Brenda and Jim exit with Mark. Dad stands alone, holding the torch. From the darkness, Mam starts singing. Dad turns and slowly leads the torch light to her face.

Mam

‘It’s a lovely day tomorrow,

Tomorrow is a lovely day,

Come and feast your tear-dimmed eyes,

On tomorrow’s clear blue sky . . . ’





Scene Two


March 1979. The living room. Jim stands, dressed in a black suit, hands in his pocket. The door is open. Sound of a boot slamming. Brenda comes in and begins putting things in her purse. She applies some lipstick. Dad comes from upstairs.

Brenda All right, Terry?

Dad (fiddling with his cufflinks) Awh, I can’t do these . . . bloody . . .

Jim Here.

Brenda I’ve put your coat in the boot of the car, Terry.

Dad What’s that?

Brenda Your coat, it’s in the boot. Need to getting going, want to be at t’ funeral home before the others don’t we? Jim, do we park there and . . . ?

Jim Yeah, they uh . . . drive us to t’ cemetery. Then drop us back after.

Dad Need a glass of water. Anyone else want a glass of water? (Exiting into the kitchen.)

Brenda You OK?

Jim (pause, nods) You?

Brenda Yeah. OK.

They hug. Mark comes down the stairs, dressed in a suit.

Brenda All right, Mark? What’s matter with your hair?!

Mark I know, it won’t bloody go down now!

Jim You put some cream on it?

Mark Had it cut, cream on it, still won’t go flat! Tell you what, punk better stay in fashion for ever otherwise I’m fucked –

Jim Mark.

Mark Buggered.

Jim Thank you.

Dad (entering with a paper) He lost vote, then. Cor, general election, hell’s bells. Past few months, I doubt they’ll get in again. Which means the bloody Tories. Eh, and not just the bloody Tories but that bloody woman! Bah! Well, say goodbye to life as we know it, blimey . . .

Brenda Everybody ready? Mark, you got that reading?

Mark Uh, I’ve . . . I’ve added a bit. (Unfolding a piece of paper.) Just thought . . . something at end might be . . . It’s last few lines of that play, Dad. ’Member? Thought it might be appropriate, like . . . Dunno.

Jim (reading)

‘Now that civil wounds are stopped, peace lives here again.

That she may long live here, God say Amen.’

Dad Civil wounds stopped? Ah, well, we’ll wait and see.

Jim Ay, it’ll do.

Dad Course you know what wounds are healed wi’? Scabs. And you can’t rely on scabs.

Jim Da-ad.

Dad Oh, I’m only messing. Warning you, though, lad. Just wait and bloody see.

Brenda Right, that’s enough bloodys and fucks for today, OK? And enough frigging politics. Just have a day of, will you? Jim, close front door behind us. We’re off.

Brenda exits through the front door, followed by Mark. Jim waits for Dad, who is sorting things in his pockets and arranging his tie.

Dad Hate these bloody things, always have done. (Sighs.) Awh God. I’m dreading this. (Pause. Struggles a bit.) I . . . I don’t want to have a look at her in t’ coffin, Jim, it’s . . . Could you gerr’em to seal before I go in, like? I can’t bear to see her like that . . .

Jim Yeah . . .

Dad I want to remember that girl. What I looked down at from the balcony. Of Beverley Road Baths. Folk keep going on about today being so as you can say goodbye. I said bye long time ago. Them last months. That weren’t her. She . . . well . . . this is just . . . final whistle, in’t it? (With his tie.) How’s it looking?

Dad stands in front of Jim, who wiggles his tie a bit, gently dusting down his arms.

Dad ’Member to close the door to, behind yer.

Dad leaves. Jim stands alone. Hands in his pocket. Looking at Mam’s chair.

Lights down.





A History of Falling Things





Cast List


A History of Falling Things was first performed at Clwyd Theatr Cymru, Mold, on 23 April 2009. The cast was as follows:

Robin

Sion Pritchard



Jacqui

Katie McGuinness



Jimmy

Francois Pandolfo



Reece

Ifan Huw Dafydd



Lesley

Di Botcher



John (Voice)

Philip Bretherton



Boy

Matthew Cavallini, Adam Walker



Director Kate Wasserberg

Designer Mark Bailey

Lighting Tom White

Sound Kevin Heyes

Animator Paddy Molloy

Choreographer Francesca Jaynes





Characters


Robin

Jacqui

Lesley, Robin’s mum

Reece, Jacqui’s dad

Jimmy, a courier

Boy

John, Robin’s psychologist (voice only)





A Note on the Text


A forward slash ( / ) indicates that the next speaker overlaps at this point.

(Speech in brackets) indicates that the line is spoken internally/ sotto voce.

Speech that is indented thus indicates that a character is addressing the audience directly.





A Boy stands, waiting. He wears kneepads, a cycling helmet, and a rucksack.

A shoe falls from the sky and hits the Boy on his head. The Boy looks around and sees the shoe on the floor. He picks it up. He looks up at the sky, then back at the shoe. He looks up at the sky, then back at the shoe. He looks up at the sky. . .

He puts the shoe in his bag and leaves. . .



A kitchen table. The Boy goes and sits under it, replacing his cycling helmet with a saucepan. From his rucksack he retrieves some books.

The Boy looks out from under the table, up towards the sky. He takes out a Walkman and puts on a pair of headphones, pressing ‘play’.

Music.

The Boy opens a book and begins to read, all the time taking intervals to look out from the table, up towards the sky.

Fade to black, as the music grows. . .



Lights up on the kitchen table. Robin is sitting underneath it, scribbling in a notebook. A laptop nearby. As the music fades, he looks up to the sky, then carries on writing. He looks over what he’s done.

Robin (reading) ‘“Will you play . . . ” ’

Scribbles something out. Rewrites.

‘“Can I play with you?” Pluto said.

As Mars and Venus shook their head.

“But why not?” Pluto did say’ –

No, that’s crap. (Say, may, way . . . play?) Play?

(Writing.) ‘Pluto was . . .

‘Pluto was sad. “Why can’t I play?”

You let me join in yesterday.”’ (Yes.)

‘“You aren’t one of us,” hissed Saturn

As the rest began their circling pattern,

And no matter how much Pluto tried,

He just had to watch. Alone. Outsi – ’

A beep from the computer. Robin leans over and checks it.

Robin Oh. Hello. Where did you come from?

Blackout.



The voices of Robin and John, talking over the phone.

John (off) Where are you now?

Robin (off) What do you mean?

John (off) You know what I mean, Robin. Where are you speaking to me from? Are you under the table again?

Robin (off) I . . . (Sighs.) I’m moving around. I’m –

John (off) All right. All right. So, what’s new? How are you doing?

Robin (off) Nothing’s . . . I’ve – there’s – I’m never any different. John. Nothing changes. Since yesterday, since the day before, since . . . well, since then, really.

John (off) But now you’re a man.

Robin (off) But hardly anything has changed. / That’s my –

John (off) And whose fault is that?

Robin (off) What?

John (off) And whose fault is that, Robin?

Robin (off) I’m not finding this particularly helpful today.

John (off) Because you aren’t trying. And you’re not paying for it, she is.

Robin (off) Pay . . . (Sighs.) Paying for me to get worse. / (Waste of money.)

John (off) You aren’t getting worse. What was that?

Robin (off) I’m . . . I’m staying – it – that, that’s what I’m – it, it, it –

John (off) Calm down, take a breath.

Robin (off) It – I wasn’t –

John (off) Calm down.

Robin (off) I wasn’t stuttering, I was, I was emphasising. Just –

John (off) Just calm down.

Robin (off) I’m staying the same, is what I’m saying. So this, this can’t be helping –

John (off) You’re not getting worse, though, are you? Maybe if we didn’t speak, if we didn’t have these little chats, you would be getting worse. Ipso facto, you’re getting better.

Robin (off) (Ipso facto.)

John (off) One minute, Robin, and then I have to go.

Robin (off) I need to tell you something.

John (off) What?

Robin (off) Before you hang up. Um. (Urgh.) OK.

John (off) Go on.

Robin (off) I’d like her to hear about it, but not – I don’t want her to hear about it in a way that makes it sound like I’ve said it to you so that you’ll say it to her, because even though I am, that will make it sound bigger than it is, when it –

John (off) Robin, please.

Robin (off) I’ve met someone.

John (off) You’ve met someone?

Robin (off) I’ve. Met someone.

John (off) You. You’ve Met Someone, I don’t under – How? Are we talking about a girl? How?

Robin (off) Just . . . feeling around. In the dark. Trying to find something. My world, it’s so . . . and in the middle of the darkness. After lots – after scrabbling around. I found her.

John (off) Sorry, wait, she’s . . . How did you find her?

Robin (off) I just . . . (Laughing.) I just typed it in.

John (off) Typed it in?

Robin (off) Into one of the things, the search engines, just typed it in.

On a screen, a flashing curser types out the word as he spells it.

Robin (off) K-E-R-A-U-N-O-T-H-N-E-T-O-P-H-O-B-I-A. Keraunothnetophobia.

‘A fear of falling satellites’.

The screen disappears. Darkness again.

Just like that. And there’s this chat – this chatroom type thing and everyone – from all over the world, everyone just . . . some nutters at first. But then. This girl. Right here, who lives right . . . and so I just . . . I just typed –

He can be heard onstage, which is still in darkness. Typing.

Robin Hello.

Robin (off – back on the phone) And so she typed –

Jacqui can be heard on stage, still in darkness. Typing.

Jacqui Hello.

Robin Hello. (Laughing.) Hi.

Jacqui Hi. How are you?

Robin I’m OK. Thank you. How are you?

Jacqui I’m OK. Would you like to see me?

Robin What do you . . . how do / you mean?

Jacqui See each other, I mean, sorry. Do you have a webcam?

Robin (off, on the phone) And so, bing. Light.

Jacqui appears in a spot, stage left. Robin can still only be heard.

Jacqui Hello?

Robin Hello. Wow. (Sorry.) I (shit) I –

Jacqui Can you see me? You’re not on.

Robin What?

Jacqui I can’t see you.

Robin Oh. I can see you.

Jacqui Something’s wrong. Is it installed?

Robin Let me . . . (piece of) . . . Sorry. One second.

Jacqui (waiting) Feels weird, being looked at when . . . when I can’t see –

Robin There.

Robin appears in a light, stage right. They look at each other.

Robin How’s that?

Jacqui Oh. Yes. There you are. (Beat. Smiles.) Hello.

Robin Hello. (Laughing.) Sorry. I’ve . . . I’ve never done this before.

Jacqui Oh God, no. No, me neither. Not really.

Robin So, is your name really CityKitten84 or . . . ?

Jacqui Huh. Um. It’s Jacqui.

Robin Robin. Hello.

Jacqui Hi. (Pause.) You’re how I imagined actually.

Robin Really?

Jacqui From what you’ve – the things you written to . . . in the chatroom. Thing. Yeah. A bit. (Giggles.) I’m embarrassed, sorry.

Robin You look . . .

Jacqui What?

Robin (pause) Really . . .

Jacqui (beat; giggles) What?

Robin (beat; shrugs) Perfect.

Jacqui (speaking out) He didn’t say that.

Robin Yes I did.

Jacqui No.

Robin In my head that’s what I said.

Jacqui But out of your mouth came . . . ?

Robin It had been a while. I was out of practice.

Jacqui He said I looked ‘good’. ‘In the face.’

Robin That is what I said. But you found it funny.

Jacqui I found it charming. In a bumbling kind of way. (Laughing.) ‘You look good in the face.’

Robin Thank you.

Jacqui No. Thank you.

Jacqui So that’s your place. Let me see.

As Robin turns and looks around, light spreads across his living room, stage right.

What we see is half a room, cut off in the middle. At the cut-off point, the furniture there too is cut in half. Half a bookcase, half a sofa, a door at the rear, a desk at the back, etc. It’s evening. . .

Robin Just your average living room in your average house / in your –

Jacqui Detached, semi-detached, flat?

Robin House. Terraced.

Jacqui Ha! Mine too. Is it yours?

Robin Yes. What do you mean?

Jacqui Do you own it?

Robin Oh no. No, God, no way. I rent it.

Jacqui Right. Course.

Robin But I rent it On My Own. That’s what I thought you –

Jacqui Yeah, no. It’s very nice.

Robin Even round here, now, prices have . . . even now, it –

Jacqui Lots of books.

Robin Yeah, lots of books. I – that’s what I – I’m a writer.

Jacqui A writer? Really?

Robin That’s how I . . . you know, survive.

Jacqui What do you write?

Robin You know. Books. Things. Children’s books.

Jacqui Ha! That’s really cool.

Robin Well. And yours? You, yours?

Jacqui Oh. Just . . .

She turns and looks around, as light spreads round her bedroom, also cut in half, so that, apart from the difference in appearance, they could perhaps be two halves of the same room, with a ‘no man’s land’ of darkness centre stage, between them.

Jacqui’s bedroom looks like that of a young girl. Single bed. Bright colours. . .

Robin Wow. God, so that’s your –

Jacqui I know what you’re thinking.

Robin I’m not / thinking anything.

Jacqui It’s my old room. I’ve had it since I was, like, six. So . . .

Robin Was it weird. Coming back?

Jacqui It was depressing. And yet a little bit . . . I don’t know. A little bit not.

Robin Different from London.

Jacqui Uh, yeah. Ah-uh. Yeah, different from London.

Robin But ‘home’, though.

Jacqui Yeah. Nice to have my dad close again. In some ways.

Robin How close?

Jacqui His bedroom is next door.

Robin That must be weird.

Jacqui Yeah, a little. Everyone is trying hard to understand. It’s not easy for them. Particularly Dad.

Robin It’s not easy for anyone.

Jacqui He says I’ve lost my accent.

Robin Yeah, my folks said that. When I came back from uni. You get it back, though.

Jacqui You went to uni?

Robin Yeah. Well, kinda. For a bit.

Jacqui It just sounded like . . . from the things you posted on the . . . on the thing. It just sounded like you’d been like this. For a while.

Robin I didn’t finish. It got too . . . um, ‘much’. But I’ve done – I did one of those, uh, Open University thingies instead. From here. From home.

Jacqui Oh, right. OK. Well done.

Robin I’m glad you moved back. It’s nice to feel like someone is close. For what it’s worth.

Jacqui Yeah. Well. For what it’s worth.

Robin Right. What?

Jacqui Well, you may as well be in Dubai or, or, you know –

Robin Sure.

Jacqui But no, you’re right, it’s nice. For what it’s worth. (Beat. Referencing her clothes.) I wish I’d put something nicer on. This –

Robin Don’t be – you look so. Nice.

Jacqui Well. Thank you. I . . . (Looks down at herself.)

Jacqui (speaking out) I knew what he was thinking.

Robin I wasn’t.

Jacqui You were. You thought I’d planned it, got done up to look good for you.

Robin Well I, it had crossed my mind. / But I liked that.

Jacqui Well, I didn’t. When I’m working, even now it’s from home, if I am working, it helps, it helps me to feel smart. Like I’m out there. It wasn’t for you.

Robin OK, OK.

Robin disappears. Jacqui faces out and mouths ‘It was’ to us. Robin reappears.

Jacqui So I’ll see you again? Maybe tomorrow?

Robin Yeah. Tomorrow’s good.

Blackout.



Robin and John over the phone again.

John (off) Have the dreams changed since you met? What fell in your dream last night?

Robin (off) Rain, at first. Like always. And then frogs.

John (off) Oh, the frogs are back, are they? I thought we’d got rid of the frogs.

Robin (off) No. They’re back. And then it was pennies.

John (off) Pennies from heaven, eh? And then the usual.

Robin (off) There was something else. Before the usual.

John (off) Before the satellite? What?

Robin (off) . . . Blood.

John (off) Blood?

Robin (off) Yes.

John (off) That’s a new one.

Robin (off) What do you think it means?

John (pause, off) Probably nothing.



Robin and Jacqui on their respective sides.

Jacqui What started you writing for children?

Robin I just. (Shrugs.) Wanted to tell stories. Loved them growing up. Even though they generally scared the shit out of me. Think children’s stories can be the scariest of all. Watership Down, do you remember that? Rabbits being eaten by dogs or shot or run over by cars; that was nice.

Jacqui I was big into Disney. Used to dress up, had a little crown and everything. My mum bought me this music box. Spinning princess in it. Still have it. (Loser.) She used to sing this song to me and then she found this box, in a shop somewhere, that was playing the same thing. And she couldn’t believe it. So she bought it for me to have when she wasn’t here.

Which was more and more, as it goes.

Robin (beat) Chicken Licken, course. The chicken who believed the sky was falling down.

Jacqui Yeah, course. Even though it wasn’t.

Robin Even though it wasn’t. Robin Hood.

Jacqui Your namesake.

Robin Exactly. Used to pretend. Save Maid Marian. From the castle.

Jacqui There aren’t any Jacquis in fairytales. Sucks. No one cool was ever called Jacqui.

Robin Jackie Kennedy.

Jacqui Oh yeah. S’pose.

Robin The Snowman. See, that was scary.

Jacqui That wasn’t scary.

Robin Uh, the Snowman melts to death at the end.

Jacqui Oh yeah.

Robin I’m telling you. Kids’ stories.

Jacqui Well, I guess it’s about helping them learn.

Robin Learn what?

Jacqui That life is full of danger. And sadness. And disappointment.

Robin Well, they certainly gave me nightmares.

Jacqui I get nightmares. My whole . . . my thing started with . . . you know . . .

Robin Did it?

Jacqui It’s getting late again. I should probably –

Robin Yeah. Course.

Jacqui (beat) Sweet dreams.

Jacqui disappears. The middle area between the two rooms opens out, as Robin enters the space, holding an umbrella. It’s raining. Music.

Robin Cats and dogs. From what I can tell it has never ever rained cats and dogs anywhere. What has been recorded though is frogs . . .

It starts to rain frogs.

Lots and lots of frogs. Above Minneapolis in 1901, a green cloud appeared overhead, and a deluge began. While driving through Scotland in 1955, falling frogs pelted Nellie Straw’s car. They fell again as recently as 1981 in Nephalion, Greece, where frogs, at the time, were not even indigenous. They are now. The only hypothesis the scientists can cling to is the waterspout phenomenon, where animals are sucked up into the sky and carried through clouds before being dropped over land. Then there’s the fish.

It starts to rain fish.

Some perch fish showered a parking lot in Northern Australia, some four hundred miles from the sea. Catfish, bream and bass rained down over Alabama in 1956. Local legend records that they were very, very tasty.

It starts to rain notes, and then coins.

Lucky were a French community in 1957 when thousand-franc notes floated down over their village from a clear blue sky. Less lucky, depending on how you look at it, were the party of schoolchildren being walked home in Manchester, 1982, when they began to be pelted with pennies. The more resourceful ones not injured gathered as much as they could and ran straight to the nearest sweet shop. Stranger still, the coins that fell over Gorky in Russia were from the sixteenth century and could not be accounted for.

Various objects now begin to rain down.

The house in Evans, Colorado, that for the past one hundred and twenty odd years has suffered the occasional shower of corn, battering its roof. Then there is the as yet unproven myth of the Japanese fishing boat sunk off the coast of Siberia – the traumatised crew insisting wholeheartedly that the hole in the middle of the deck was caused by nothing other than . . . a cow. Falling from above.

It begins to rain blood.

And in Li Yan, France, and in Calabria, Italy, and in California, and in India, where recorded, falling from the sky, were tiny little droplets of scarlet-red blood . . .

Electronic beeps. Robin looks up as a shadow is cast over him. The sound of a heavy object plummeting to the ground. Robin ducks. The noise is cut off instantly by:



Jacqui and Robin on their respective sides. Drinking tea.

Robin You’ve never seen it.

Jacqui Is it that one with the aliens?

Robin No, that’s Close Encounter. Brief Encounter is the black-and-white one. With the train station? We could watch it together. Well, not together, but . . . you know. At the same time.

Jacqui Yeah, OK. Like a date.

Robin Uh. Yeah. I . . . Do, do British people, do they go on dates? I always thought that was American.

Jacqui I went on dates. In London. Kind of.

Robin Did you?

Jacqui I like the way that women used to be kissed in the old films. The way they’d get flung around. By Clark Gable or someone, and they’d . . . (Trying to demonstrate.) Sort of, they’d get the girl’s, this hair, kind of get flicked round and lean on his hands . . .

Robin I used to love how men held guns. Be like this. (Demonstrates.) Elbows pointing straight out from the hip. Like that. Keeping it close. Now in films it’s up and out.

Stands and holds his arm out, parallel with his shoulder, finger pointed.

Like, and legs spread apart. More showy, I suppose.

Jacqui My dad says in classic love films, the colour ones are more likely to see them get together in the end and the black-and-white ones, they’re more likely to end up apart.

Robin Dunno, maybe. They end up apart in Casablanca. And Brief Encounter.

Jacqui Well, that’s why life should be in full colour then.

Robin Speaking of, of, um . . . stories, I’ve got you – I’ve got a surprise for you. A present. Well it’s just a book. Well it, my, it’s just my book. Actually.

Jacqui Yours? Oh my God.

Robin I mean, don’t . . . You know, I mean I get copies free so don’t . . . it’s no biggie. / But.

Jacqui Oh, don’t ruin it. That’s really kind. Thank you. But I can just order one online.

Robin No, I’ve got a courier. Coming. To, to pick it up, and bring it round.

Jacqui Robin.

Robin Don’t think anything of it.

Knock at Robin’s door. Robin opens it. Jimmy, the courier, stands there.

Jimmy Pick up from Robin?

Robin Hi. Yes, here. Uh, address is, is on the front.

Jimmy Cheers.

A space opens out between the rooms: the doorway to Jacqui’s house.

Reece opens the door to Jimmy.

Reece Oh. Hello.

Jimmy Delivery.

Reece I didn’t order a pizza.

Jimmy It’s not a pizza, it’s a package.

Reece A package, who for?

Jimmy For Jacqui, says here.

Reece Oh. Right. She’s – that’s my daughter, she’s upstairs.

Jimmy Sign here, please.

Reece She’s always getting packages from London, you know. Bit late for work, though.

Jimmy I don’t think it was work. It comes from a boy.

Reece A boy?

Jimmy Well, a young man I suppose. Charlton Street, five minutes or so.

Reece From a boy on Charlton Street? She doesn’t know any boys round here, Jacqui; she doesn’t know anyone any more.

Jimmy Right.

Reece Locks herself away in her room, you see.

Jimmy Right. Have a good night then, sir.

Reece Oh yes. Right-oh. Good night.



Jacqui’s room. Reece enters.

Jacqui Dad.

Reece Package here.

Jacqui Thank you.

Reece From a boy, he said, the fella.

Jacqui Uh, yeah. A friend. I’ve met. Sort of.

Reece A friend you’ve met sort of?

Jacqui Yes.

Reece (at the computer) What, on that thing?

Jacqui Yes.

Reece Oh. Oh right.

Jacqui Is he still here? The courier?

Reece He’s just getting on his bike. (Laughs.) ‘On yer bike’, eh. Ha ha. Do you want me to bring your tea up or are you coming down?

Jacqui Dad, can you do me a favour? (With a card.) Can you ask him to deliver this?

Reece What’s that now?

Jacqui Please, here’s some money.

Reece Well, he’s going, he’s probably got another job –

Jacqui No, look, he’s still outside on his radio.

Reece Oh Lord, all – (Sighs, takes the card.) Wait here.



Downstairs. Reece with Jimmy at the doorway.

Reece I am sorry.

Jimmy It’s just I only had one more and then was clocking off, you see?

Reece I’ve got some money.

Jimmy It’s not the money, I’m meant to be going out.

Reece Oh, anywhere nice?

Jimmy Just a curry. With the missus. Well, I say missus, we haven’t really had that chat yet, but –

Reece I would really appreciate it. It seems to mean a lot to her, for some reason.

Jimmy (counting the money) I’m not sure this is enough, to be honest with you.

Reece (taking out his wallet and more cash) Oh, I see. Uh, there you go then.

Jimmy Oh. Thank you. Well, I’ll see what I can do.

Reece You know, I reckon that’s the problem with young people in cities, don’t you? Because they can get anything they want instantly they have no sense of prudence. Or of waiting for anything. She could have just as well stuck a stamp on that and I’d have posted it and it could’ve been there the day after next, but oh no. Must have now.

Jimmy I know what you mean, sir, I know exactly what you mean.

Reece (speaking out) We laugh about this little exchange in months to come.

Jimmy We do, he’s right.

Jimmy Good evening then, sir.

Reece Ay, go well, young man, go well.



Knock on Robin’s door. Robin answers.

Robin Oh. Hello again. Was there a problem?

Jimmy Pick up and return. (Handing him the card.) Here. For you.

Robin From her?

Jimmy Yes, from her. Via him, from her.

Robin Via him?

Jimmy Her dad. Nice chap. I’ll see you later.

Robin Wait. Could you –?

Jimmy Oh no, no, that’s it, I’m off home –

Robin No, just a question, I . . . it’s just . . . I, I wanted to know. What she was. Like.

Jimmy Who? The girl?

Robin Yeah.

Jimmy You’ve never met?

Robin No.

Jimmy I didn’t see her. She was upstairs. It was her dad who I dealt with, I’m afraid.

Robin Oh. OK.

Jimmy She seemed nice from downstairs, though.

Robin Really, you can tell?

Jimmy Sometimes you just get a vibe, don’t you?

Robin Yeah. I suppose you do.

Jimmy leaves. Robin closes the door. Begins opening the card. Turns to Jacqui.

Robin What’s this?

Jacqui I just wanted . . . I don’t know. I just wanted you to have something there that . . . I don’t know, that used to be here. Some . . . (Sighs.) contact, or (I don’t know.)

Robin (reads the front) ‘Congratulations on passing your driving test.’ Awh.

Jacqui Sorry. Only one I had. For my nephew.

Robin Oh, I’m sorry, you shouldn’t have –

Jacqui No that’s OK, he won’t pass. Least I bloody hope not.

Robin ‘Thanks for the book. Love, Jacqui.’ (Pause.) Thank you.

Jacqui No. (With her book.) No, thank you.

Robin (Lovely handwriting.)

Jacqui Jesus, you must be so proud. The illustrations are beautiful. Did you do them?

Robin No.

Jacqui Well. I can’t wait to read it. ‘Ages five and above.’ Good, I’m covered.

Robin (sniffing the card) Your hand cream.

Jacqui You didn’t do that.

Robin No, I know. I waited till later. When I was on my own. Thought you might have found it pervy.

Jacqui And I would have done. But also sweet.

Robin ‘U-I.’

Jacqui Uh?

Robin Jacqui – ‘U-I’ at the end. In my head it, it’s always been ‘I-E’. (Strange.)

Jacqui Nope, just ‘U’ and ‘I’. Quite boring, actually. Hate it.

Robin Oh I don’t know, I . . . I quite like it. That it’s just. ‘U’ and ‘I’.

They stand smiling at each other for a while. Blackout on Jacqui and her house.



Lesley enters Robin’s house carrying bags of food and other more random objects, such as framed photos, vases and plastic flowers, cleaning products etc. She places items, retrieves others and cleans throughout, never stopping.

Lesley Phoah, cold outside today, Gordon Bennett, cold for May, anyway. Well, compared to last year, remember the spring we had last year, absolutely boiling, wasn’t it? Too hot, I thought, but then again, think of the summer, well, whatever summer we had, which wasn’t much, remember? Not that it makes much difference to you in here. Still, with the windows open and everything. So maybe that’s it, maybe rotten spring means we’ll actually have a bloody summer, who knows? No rhyme or reason most of the time, is there, the weather? Don’t suppose it was quite the same down there, was it, when you were at what’s-it. Even on a little island like this, they say there’s differences, don’t they? Well, you only have to look at Scotland, their weather, like another country isn’t it – well, I suppose it is another country, in many ways, well, in most ways really. That accent, Christ. Got you a bit of the stew we had last night, here.

Robin (takes it) Thank you.

Lesley Me and your brother, he was round with the kids, don’t know where she was, got the impression I wasn’t meant to ask, if you know what I mean, look on the kids’ face though, patently obvious – is that right, patently? blatantly? – anyhow, ‘apparent’, it was, they’d been rowing. Hope they sort it out. Your father and I never rowed. Above and beyond what you’d expect in a marriage, course. Nowadays, why is it nowadays you make it all so complicated? I reckon it’s cos you all watch too many of them soaps.

Robin I don’t even ask any more. What she brings round in them bags, I don’t care. I’ll wake up and there’ll be a new family photo on my bedside table, staring at me, but I just can’t ask any more. And it makes absolutely no odds to her whether I notice or not.

Lesley Had a go at the path thing today? Outside, like John said? Couple of steps? One more each day? Reckon that’s a good idea, I do.

Robin It doesn’t work, Mum.

Lesley You should listen to John more, he’s a very talented man.

Robin He’s a waste of your money, Mum.

Lesley Right, there we are, jobs done, I’ll have to get back, that phone’ll be ringing off the hook and they’ll be wondering where I’ve got to. Anything you want to tell me? Any news? That you’ve not brought up yet? Work stuff, or . . . social? Anything?

Robin Uh, well . . . I, I do meet people, you know, Mum, I, I have. Met someone. Sort of.

Lesley A girl? (Laughs excitedly, covers her mouth.) Sorry. A girl?

Robin It’s no big deal, Mum, don’t / get worked –

Lesley Does she come round here, then?

Robin No.

Lesley No?

Robin No, she . . . we met, we’ve only met online.

Lesley Online?

Robin Yes.

Lesley On that thing?

Robin Yes.

Lesley (beat) Well that’s no good, is it?

Robin It’s fine.

Lesley You don’t know who it could be, could be some pervert, some fat old man.

Robin I’ve seen her.

Lesley You’ve seen her?

Robin We use a webcam.

Lesley You use a webcam?

Robin Mum, you’re doing it again!

Lesley No, love, that’s not right, you need more than that. It’s not enough.

Robin It’s no big deal.

Lesley You’ll see. In the end, it’s not enough. You’re a human, Robin, humans need physical contact. Something you are seriously malnutritioned in – is that right? Malnourished?

Robin I’m fine, Mum.

Lesley More than that, you’re a man, a growing man. And you’ve got urges. I know.

Robin (Oh God.)

Lesley And she’ll have ’em, as well. And people may say it isn’t important, but it is. You’ve got to be compatible. Sexually, I mean. And until / you try that, there’s –

Robin Oh God, aah! (Putting his fingers in his ears.) Ah-la-la-ah-yaaah! Mum, Christ!

Lesley We-ell. You know I’m right. I may be your mother but I’m also a woman.

Robin I’m, I’m either going to have to hit my head against the wall until I pass out or you’re going to have to stop talking. Please, please.

Lesley All right. You’ll find out before long. Half an hour, that stew, see you tomorrow.

She kisses him on the cheek and leaves.



Robin in his house, Jacqui in her room, each tying a balloon.

Jacqui (with a marker pen) So what am I doing . . . ?

Robin (with his own) You write my name. And I write yours.

Jacqui (laughing) This is ridiculous.

Robin I’m telling you. Read this story once, about a girl, young girl in Scotland. Wrote her name on a balloon, let it go from her back garden. Weeks later, girl with the same name, somewhere in England, standing in her garden, caught it as it floated down, and turned it round to read her own name. If we will it hard enough, it’ll reach me, and mine yours. Humour me. ‘Any way we can’, remember. Where you letting it go?

Jacqui Just out the window. You?

Robin Skylight, upstairs landing. (Shivers.) Ugh. Normally have to duck and run under that thing, but on this occasion, I’ll make a, a . . . you know. So. Ready?

They lean into the area, centre stage, and let go of the balloons. They float up.

Music, as they watch.

Fade out.



Day. Robin in his house. Jacqui is in her room.

Jacqui (referencing his books) Have you read them all?

Robin I’ve. I’ve read something ‘within’ them all. A chapter. Or whatever.

Jacqui What are they on? Mainly.

Robin Just everything. Random things. Got car manuals up there. Gardening. Walks in Nepal. Just stuff.

Jacqui Why?

Robin (shrugs) It’s how you learn, isn’t it?

Jacqui That a French one? You speak French?

Robin Uh, oui. Un peu.

Jacqui You ever been?

Robin No. (Beat. Confused.) No, of course not.

Pause.

Jacqui I couldn’t do this; just take a break like this normally. I need to feel like I’m . . . I’m still doing something, contributing. Can’t get used to working from home. Maybe it’s cos I’m in my old room. Bit different from Canary Wharf.

What do you miss the most? About out there. What is it that drives you crazy?

Robin (beat; shrugs) Nothing.

Jacqui Nothing; are you mad? I miss loads. I miss everything. I miss the city. Miss the buzz. The busyness. I miss . . . friends. I miss, I even miss having . . . (Sighs.) enemies. People to get one over on. Miss bars, clubs. Dancing. Dancing in a club. I miss catching someone’s eye. In passing. On a train, in the street. Just sharing something. Silently. With someone you don’t even know. (Pause.) I will get better. I will.

Robin (beat) What were the dreams?

Jacqui Uh?

Robin You said it started with dreams. Don’t have to tell me. Just . . .

Pause.

Jacqui Erm, well. Just, you know . . . just bad. Bad dreams. It didn’t actually begin with . . . satellites. It was . . . other things. At first.

Robin Me too.

Jacqui Started about three, four years – what date is it? Yeah, about four years ago. A very, erm . . . well, a very specific moment. Shall we say. I was on the Tube.

Robin The Tube? Surely one of the safest places you could be. From falling things.

Jacqui Yeah. You would think. I lived in Balham, when I was in London.

Robin ‘The gateway to the south.’ Huh.

Jacqui Yeah. What?

Robin Oh, just . . . Peter – it’s a Peter Sellers sketch.

Jacqui Right.

Robin (as Peter Sellers) ‘Ah, Bal-ham. The Gateway to the South.’

Jacqui Right.

Robin Sorry.

Jacqui There’s this plaque. In the ticket hall. About the people that died after a bomb dropped on the high street during the blitz.

Robin I’ve seen pictures of that. Of the crater and the bus –

Jacqui Well anyway. That’s where people would gather to be safe. Underground. But a bomb landed on the street. And rubble collapsed on to the station and shops and things fell into the crater and water pipes burst and people were crushed and buried and they died and I would often think about that – not too much – but sometimes, when I would travel to work in the morning. Thinking about what it would be like.

And then there was this morning one July.

A space opens out in the area between the rooms. A Tube seat.

Jacqui sits in it. Sounds of the Tube travelling – it suddenly grinds to a stop.

Jacqui I’d changed at Embankment and got on to the Circle Line. Never normally get a seat, that time of the day, Circle Line. But someone got off and I was the nearest so . . . and we were heading round to Liverpool Street. And just before we got to Aldgate, the train pulled to a halt. Nothing strange about that, always stopping. Stop, start, stop, start. Only it didn’t move for, like, ten minutes. And people were grumbling and sighing. And then the lights went out.

The lights flicker, and then die. A distant howling wind seems to build as though blowing down the cavernous tunnel. . .

And at first there was that titter of laughter, like ‘What next?’ And then more moaning. And then eventually there was just silence. And in the dark I started getting these flashes. Like flashes of being trapped. And the tunnels collapsing in. And rubble dropping down. And it felt like the oxygen was getting less and I felt like I was getting cramped and I started to begin panicking and then –

Sound of the engines starting up, as the light flickers back on and the train moves.

– we started reversing backwards. It was when we got out that we heard a bomb had gone off. Near Aldgate East. And three more around London . . .

She leaves the ‘Tube’ and returns to her room.

Everyone else . . . there was this sense of, like, ‘defiance’. Or . . . of just not being afraid. And a unity in ‘not being afraid’, but the problem was I was afraid. Of something completely different, which made me feel different to everyone else. And the dreams at first were of ceilings and roofs, and then of . . . planes . . . and then of . . . well, you know what. And who knows why? Maybe because everything else felt irrational. Freak occurrences. And I know satellites must seem, to normal people, must seem irrational. Maybe I just needed something that was always up there. That could come down at any point. Just to justify the way I was feeling –

Robin Nothing irrational about it. There are over two and a half thousand satellites up there, and that’s just the ones that are operating, it’s like a graveyard, a car park, like in February this year, when those Russian and American ones crashed into each other –

Jacqui Thanks, Robin.

Robin Oh. Sorry.

Jacqui I had to take sabbatical. Felt like a fraud. There were some people in my office who’d lost friends over there, in New York, in our office over there when . . . and I didn’t, hadn’t lost anyone, then or now, but . . . I couldn’t help it. Began to work from my flat more, hated going out. My friends, who had been supportive at first, began to . . . you know, ignore me. A bit. I wasn’t great to be around, end of the day.

Robin Yeah. Yeah, a lot of people found me . . . uh, irritating. When I had . . . ‘people’ . . .

Jacqui Eventually they, they agreed I could pretty much do most of it from here. If I wanted to move back up. Be around family. Full time. And over time I just . . . (Shrugs.) stopped leaving altogether . . .

But I’m gonna beat it. I am going to get better. So . . .

But I mean you, you’ve been . . . well. Like this. For ever.

Robin Well. In degrees. Since I was a little boy. I mean, I’d always had the need to feel . . . I dunno, enclosed, I suppose. Couldn’t poke a toe out from my duvet at night, case something came along and . . . or . . .

And then the time, erm . . . uh, the time when I was seven. And I was standing in the playground. Waiting to take my cycling proficiency test. And. And something hit me on the head. It was a shoe. A man’s shoe. And it came straight down. Not across. It didn’t have, like, an arc, like it had been thrown. It had fallen straight down. I picked it up. And I looked around; no one was looking, no one had seen. There was no laughing, no giggling. And on everyone’s feet were two shoes. And it was a man’s shoe anyway.

Jacqui Do you still have it?

Robin A black . . . a smart, black, size-eleven shoe. I looked up to see if there were any planes overhead, couldn’t see any. I couldn’t see a damn thing.

Pause.

Jacqui Did you pass your cycling proficiency?

Robin No. No, I turned round. Left the playground. And walked home.

It’s my fault. I’m told. By the people my mum sends to insult me. I indulged in the fear, I willed it to become all-consuming, apparently. I’m the kind of character that needs something such as this to patch together an identity. So there you go.

Jacqui It has been a long time.

Robin Look who’s talking.

Jacqui I’m not . . . I’m saying for me it’s only been a matter of years. I mean, when was the last time you went out?

Robin Uh, it didn’t go very well. I’ll say that much. And, and proved how I’m not ready. Despite everyone –

Jacqui What happened? You don’t have to say.

Robin It was. When my dad died. And it was his funeral. And I got to the end of the path, through the gate. Uh. Under the big tree by my road. It was pissing it down.

He enters the centre space. Under a tree. Rain and thunder. He holds himself tight.

Everyone was waiting in the cars. Mum. My brother, Mark. They, they’d tried to make it as easy as possible for me. The whole procession, pulling right up to my house. All I had to do was run across the road and get in. But then once I’m in the car, what then? Start screaming, have a panic attack? Mark and Mum had got sick of tugging on me, getting wet. Now they’re just sat in the front car. Faces appearing intermittently between the sweeps of the windscreen wipers. Imploring me just to come that little bit further. But I can’t. Looking at the hearse. ‘Dad’, written in flowers. I want to so much. So much. But I can’t. My brother’s face. I was ruining everything. But I’d gone as far as I could. So I turned around, and walked back inside.

He re-enters his house. Sits. Silence.

When they came back, my mum went next door to say thank you for something or other. I asked Mark how it had gone, and he said ‘Fine’. And then he hit me in the stomach. And it hurt. And I deserved it. But then as I was trying to stand he hit me again. And I didn’t think I deserved that. I was the one who had missed the funeral and I’d missed it because it was becoming about me and I didn’t want it to be about me, it was meant to be about Dad, and I couldn’t understand why he couldn’t understand that. I had wanted to go and stand up and talk about him. About the way he would do some proper old-school whistling as he mowed the lawn and the way he would drum with a fork on the biscuit tin; I’d wanted to do that. Mark went on about funerals being for the living, not the dead. And that day had been for Mum. And I had let her down. We haven’t really spoken since; not properly. And I don’t think that’s fair.

Pause.

Jacqui Is your mum OK, now? Is she . . . seeing anyone else, or –

Robin No. She’d never do that. She’s one of those. In it till the very end, type thing.

Jacqui Almost unheard of now.

Robin I’ll always be grateful that . . . for my – that my mum and dad . . . you know. I couldn’t have handled that. With everything else, what with all the other things I felt I had to deal with; that would have pushed me over the edge, I reckon. A broken home.

Jacqui Don’t say that, ‘broken’. Hate that.

Robin Sorry.

Jacqui Broken implies something that needs fixing. They often work. Very well.

Robin Of course. (Beat.) Even a broken home is right twice a day. Eh?

Jacqui That’s a watch.

Robin Yes, I know that.

Jacqui Oh right. Yes. Very good.

Evening. Jacqui’s room. Jacqui on her bed. Reece sitting. They drink hot chocolate. Reece is in overalls – he’s just back from work.

Reece Takes you back, eh?

Jacqui It’s lovely. Thank you.

Reece ’Member when I’d sneak it up to your room? Yours and David’s. Behind Mum’s back. Huh. She’d always be going on about your bloody teeth. ‘That hot chocolate. Ruddy well eats their teeth.’ Well, it ruddy hasn’t, has it? Look at you, early twenties, perfect teeth. Let’s see ’em.

Jacqui smiles a toothy grin.

Reece Yeah, see, perfect smile.

Jacqui How’s everything going with Julie?

Reece Oh fine, you know. We’re just friends.

Jacqui It’s all right, Dad.

Reece We are, we’re just friends. Can’t a fella be friends with a woman and they just be friends?

Jacqui You should invite her round more.

Reece (shrugs) I dunno.

Jacqui Why don’t you invite her round tonight?

Reece Nah, she’s at pilates or yogalates or whichever one it is, Wednesdays. Thing I don’t understand is, they all go out on the piss after, and sometimes a bag of bloody chips. One cancels out the other, she says. It’s like ‘offsetting’. Leaves me thinking, well why are you spending all that money to end up staying exactly the bloody same? Don’t ask me, Jacqui love, I don’t ask myself.

Sips his drink.

Christmas, this always reminds me of. Christmas Eve. What were them Plasticine things we used to watch? ’Round Christmas time. That dog, with the –

Jacqui Oh, Wallace and Gromit.

Reece Wallace and Gromit! Ha ha. Yeah. That dog. (Yeah, Wallace and Gromit.)

Sips his drink.

Jacqui How was work today?

Reece Urgh. All right. Not one bugger answered.

Jacqui Not one?

Reece Not bloody one; can you . . . ? I read two meters that were outside, but the rest . . . Charlie’ll think I took the day off when I see him tomorrow. Not my fault though, is it?

Sips his drink.

You?

Jacqui Yeah. ’S OK.

Reece Quiet at the moment, is it? What with everything, is it?

Jacqui Don’t really know. I get sent my work and I do it and I send it back. You know.

Reece Lot of jobs going though, aren’t there? Jobs being lost. Your thingy, your sector.

Jacqui I don’t really know, Dad.

Reece I guess you might be more vulnerable, eh? If they’re looking for cutbacks, people to go, I mean. Well. What with you not around. With you being ‘remote’, as it were . . .

Jacqui No one’s said anything, Dad.

Reece Right. Good. That’s good.

Jacqui Are you all right?

Reece I’m fine. What, me? Oh yeah, no I’m fine, love. Always fine. You?

Jacqui Yeah, you know.

Reece Not really, Jacqui. I don’t always really know, you know. It – I can’t . . .

I love having you here, you know that.

Jacqui Dad –

Reece It’s lovely having you back. With David in America and everything. I can’t believe it sometimes, me. My two kids, how well you’ve done, from these – what do they say? These ‘humble origins’. Huh. You in London. Well, before the . . . And David. Over in ‘America’. Huh. I can’t believe it sometimes. Very proud, you know.

Jacqui . . . Thank you.

Reece You’ve done so well. And I’d hate to see it go to waste, you know.

Jacqui Dad –

Reece It’s not that I don’t like having you back, because I do. It’s just. You’re better than this place, Jacqui. You’re better than me.

Jacqui Come on –

Reece You should be out there, love. Living. Doing.

Jacqui I just need this time. To get better.

Reece And there’s no, like, medicine, or –

Jacqui It’s not that kind of illness, Dad.

Reece Oh, I know, love. I know that, God only knows. ‘Head’ stuff. Saw it in my mam. No rhyme or reason to the things that go on up there sometimes, love, I know that.

I just hate to see you not happy, Jacqui. And I think it’s time we started working on that. I’ve no idea how, but I think it’s time we starting looking at making you happy.

First thing to prescribe is hot chocolate. There, that’s done. Check. That’s that one off the list. Right. So. What’s next?

Jacqui (smiles) A cuddle?

Reece Right. Right-oh. OK. Let me see if we’ve got any in stock, just a minute, (Moves close to her.) Ah. Here we are.

Reece hugs Jacqui. Then harder. Pause. . .

Reece Come on, now, don’t want to OD, do you?

Jacqui I don’t think I could ever OD on this.



Robin in his house. Jacqui in her room. Jacqui is holding a letter.

Robin Hey.

Jacqui Hey. (Gesturing the letter.) Your handwriting.

Robin Yep.

Jacqui What is it?

Robin Why do people always say that? Just open it.

Jacqui starts opening.

Robin You’ve not been online as much. Past few days.

Jacqui (stops opening; pause) I know. Just. I’m trying to sort a couple of things out.

Robin Work things?

Jacqui No. No. Thing things.

Robin Thing things?

Jacqui Life things. Me things. Head – you know, head things.

Pause.

Robin It’s a birthday present.

Jacqui Oh. (Goes back to opening.) Erm. Early.

Robin I know. Not for a fortnight. But you need it before. To practice.

Jacqui (opens; reads) Oh. Huh. Jive lessons?

Robin Yup.

Jacqui (laughs) Uh . . .

Robin Ages ago, you said you wanted to learn jive after seeing it on, on Strictly Come Dancing. I said we should learn together.

Jacqui Erm. God. OK. Th-thank you. Erm. Well. Obvious question.

Robin They can come to your house. It’s a ‘him’, he can . . . can come and give us each lessons, and then we can . . . you know, together, just pretend. Thought it would be fun.

Jacqui Oh God, of course. Yes, no, I . . . thank you. Of course.

It . . . it’s still just pretend, though. Isn’t it? It can never beat the real thing. You know that, don’t you?

Robin Ye-es. (Beat.) Is anything the matter?

Jacqui I guess I want to know. What we’re doing. Where . . . where we are.

Robin ‘Where we are.’ I think we might have just wandered into an episode of Dawson’s Creek. (American accent.) ‘Where we are.’

Jacqui Thank you, that’s funny.

Robin We’re making it bearable for each other. Aren’t we?

Jacqui Erm. I need more than that. I don’t want it to be bearable. I want it to be cured.

Robin I want it to be cured.

Jacqui Do you?

Robin What kind of –?

Jacqui I want to dance with you for real one day, Robin. Actually be in the same . . .

Robin Y– We . . . I . . . I . . .

Jacqui Don’t be mad at me.

Robin Why? What, why?

Jacqui I contacted that guy.

Robin What guy? / John?

Jacqui John.

Robin Why?

Jacqui Because I want to get fixed, Robin. I want to leave here. I can’t do this for ever. Why do you want to stay like this? / This isn’t life.

Robin The hell has / he been saying?!

Jacqui Stop reading about it and bloody do it.

Robin This isn’t you, / this is him, this is.

Jacqui ‘Robin Mays. Who learnt his life from a book!’ That’s no, that’s no / way to –

Robin Oh Jesus!

Jacqui I don’t think. (Pause. Calmer.) I don’t think there’s any point in us pursuing anything if it’s going to stay like this. It’s not enough, Robin. It’s not enough.

Robin Well. Hey, well . . . (Pause.) If, if, if (shh). If you get, if you get . . . (come on). If you get fixed, you could come round here. You could . . . maybe even . . . / stay –

Jacqui Don’t you want to leave your, your, your cell?

Robin Oh God, here we go, ‘my sanctuary / is my cell’.

Jacqui So what? You expect me to overcome my fear, but not you yours? Come on!

Robin What, you want me to leave? Come round to yours?

Jacqui I . . . (Sighs.) I can’t afford to feel things for someone . . . who isn’t around. I haven’t got enough left in me to do that.

Robin (grabbing his coat, making to leave) Fine, I’ll have a panic attack, cry like a baby in the street, that what you want? / Have a fit outside my house?

Jacqui I want to have something that isn’t pretend!

Robin Knock my confidence, set me / back another year.

Jacqui I want to have something that isn’t pretend!

Robin paces up and down towards the door. He opens it and takes a step out.

Jacqui Robin, for God’s sake!

Robin turns and collapses back on to the floor. He curls up, holding his head. Pause.

Jacqui Robin . . .

Robin . . . I can’t. Please. I can’t . . .

Jacqui OK. OK . . .

But I have to try.

And I probably can’t do that with you. You make it too easy to stay like this.

I have to try . . .

Robin (stands; beat; nods) You should, um. Keep the dance lessons.

Jacqui No, I . . . You can – They must have been expensive. You can probably get your –

Robin Please, just take them. Do them. Learn. I, I . . . might do too. Still. As well. Who knows.

Jacqui . . . Thank you.

Robin alone in his house. He opens a drawer in his desk, and takes out the black shoe that fell from the sky. He holds it against his head, and sits on the floor.



Jacqui alone in her room. She opens a music box. And winds it up. She places it down and it plays. A model princess turning inside. . .



Reece stands with Lesley at his doorway.

Lesley I just thought it was worth a try again. You know.

Reece Oh yes. Yes, no, always worth a try. I’m sorry she hasn’t come down.

Lesley That’s OK. I’ll try again tomorrow, if that’s all right.

Reece Well, you can if you like. Although I rather feel you might be wasting your time. It isn’t me, you understand, it doesn’t bother me –

Lesley Right.

Reece It’s just I rather get the impression she doesn’t want to have contact with . . . you know, with your lad at the moment, and thus . . . you know, vis-à-vis, vice versa –

Lesley Right.

Reece I think she thinks it wouldn’t help. With the ‘process’, you see. That chap seems to be doing a lot of good.

Lesley John?

Reece Yes. Had her standing right here this morning. Just on the other side of the door.

Lesley What? Outside?

Reece Yup. One hand firmly on the handle, mind, huhuh. But nevertheless, feet outside.

Lesley Really? So . . . so soon? Well, that’s . . . (Beat.) She must. Really want to get better. Then. That’s . . . that’s really good.

Pause. She goes to leave. Stops.

Always think we know best, though, don’t we? You spend so long trying to get rid of them, but deep down, deep deep down, the thought of them not needing you, the thought of you being, like, ‘redundant’, makes me feel sick sometimes. Makes me go all dizzy and I need a sit down. Huh.

Reece Like I say, I did try to get her to see you. But it’s complicated. You know.

Lesley Yes, of . . . These things often are.

Reece Exactly.

Lesley I think that things are more complicated than they ever used to be.

Reece You’re right. You are right there.

Lesley I look around sometimes. Sometimes I just stop and look and I think to myself. I’m sure this didn’t used to be . . . quite so complicated.

Pause.

Tell her well done. From me. That’s . . . that really is very, very good.

Darkness. John and Robin speaking over the phone.

John (off) Jacqui has realised, has had the revelation, the one you refuse to have, that the thing stopping her going outside was in fact something else.

Robin (off) Stop trying to take her away from me.

John (off) That it isn’t real, Robin. This fear of yours. It’s a device. It’s an excuse.

Robin (off) Mir Space Station, April 2005, falls into the / South Pacific, close to Fiji.

John (off) Robin. Robin, come on.

Robin (off) BeppoSAX. Dutch Italian Satellite, dropped out of orbit before scheduled.

John (off) Robin, I know / you have a whole bag of facts ready to counter my –

Robin (off) Lands luckily into a deserted area of the Pacific Ocean, but the threat was real enough to put thirty-nine separate countries / on high alert –

John (off) Until you ask yourself what it is you’re actually afraid of. What besides things dropping from the sky, things that you know, deep down, if you ever had the courage to look, that you know Aren’t Ever Going To Fall.

Robin (off) What goes up, John. What goes up. / Must come down.

John (off) Can sometimes stay up, Robin.

Robin (off) Stop my mum from trying to help. I don’t want her to help me.

John (off) Your / mother is –

Robin (off) January 1997. Woman, Oklahoma, hit on the head by orbital / debris from –

John (off) If you confront what you’re actually afraid of, Robin, then we could diagnose it. And then cure it. If only you wanted to get better.

Robin (off) People keep saying that. Like it’s a disease. I’m the most contented person I know. It’s you who has the problems. I look at people from my window, see you on the television, listen on the radio. Your problems sound so horrible. My life is simple.

John (off) Robin, you’re life isn’t real. You need to grow up.

Robin (off) Isn’t the most important thing to be happy? However you find it? Just to be happy?



Jacqui’s room. Jacqui sits on her bed. Lesley stands. Looks around.

Lesley It’s nice. Nice that your dad kept it the way . . . you know, the way it was.

Jacqui I guess.

Lesley I changed Robin’s. Never really thought about that until now, guess that might have annoyed him a little bit. I just didn’t think. As soon as he went off to uni, bam. I was in. Posters down. Duvet cover off. It’s a guest bedroom, now. So it’s still a bedroom, but . . . I say Robin’s, it was Robin and Mark’s, they used to share, had bunk-beds. Ooh, did they used to fight. Huh. I’d be downstairs, doing whatever, and you’d just hear this ‘thud’. And I knew it’d be one throwing one of them off the other one’s bed. And I’d be able to guess from the size of the thud whether whoever had fallen from the bottom or the top, and that’d tell me who it was that had been thrown. Mark was on the top, see. Robin bottom. If Robin was annoyed, and feeling brave enough, he’d push Mark’s mattress up with his feet. Used to wind Mark up so much.

Does it bother you, having a single bed? I suppose you had a double in your flat in London. Or even a king size. Wouldn’t bother me, you know, I don’t move around at all; certainly don’t move over to the other side of the bed, you’d never catch me over there. Don’t know why, really, I just find myself waking up in the exact same spot I went to sleep in, you know? Guess that’s what comes of sleeping in the same bed as someone else for twenty-seven years.

I hope you don’t mind me coming up.

Jacqui It is a little strange.

Lesley Is it?

Jacqui I can’t remember the last time anyone was in my room except my dad. (Pause.) Used to love having people in here. As a kid.

Lesley Yeah?

Jacqui Having the girls round for sleepovers. Michelle. Andrea. Rachel. Do girls still do that? Sleepovers?

Lesley I expect they do, yes.

Jacqui (beat) Darren Connolly. Huh. Remember when he came in here. After school one day. That was weird. I didn’t have a clue what I was doing. I was so scared . . .

Lesley Is your dad all right, on his own, does he cope?

Jacqui He’s seen some other people. Not in any kind of committed way. I don’t think he can be bothered any more, actually. I wish he would.

Lesley Still have a candle for your mum a bit, does he? – that what they say? ‘Hold a torch for’ or something.

Jacqui I couldn’t tell you.

Lesley When was it she left? Do you mind me asking?

Jacqui I do a little bit.

Lesley Oh, right.

Jacqui She left more than once. Came back. More than once.

Lesley Right.

Jacqui I think it’s better to either have someone or not.

Lesley Right.

Jacqui Back when I had friends, when I had boyfriends, back when I had a life, in London when I had a life, it always struck me that the single people I knew were actually quite happy and the people in relationships I knew were happy but the people who had a crush on or yearned for or secretly loved or were kind of ‘with’ but kind of ‘not with’ someone . . . that they were the most unhappy.

So, I think it’s better to either just have someone or just not.

Lesley But better to have someone than not, eh?

Pause.

How far did you get today?

Jacqui To the house across the street; I touched the wall.

Lesley You touched the wall!

Jacqui Ran out. Screaming. Touched the wall. Ran back. Shut the door.

Lesley Well that’s . . . !

Jacqui And I’m taking my dance lessons. Inside, but –

Lesley Well. You . . . You Are Doing Really Well.

Jacqui I am. I am doing well. So I don’t . . . I can’t jeopardise –

Lesley The thing is, Robin needs something to strive for, to fight for, in order to make that leap, and he’s never had anything worth fighting before and I just think –

Jacqui I don’t think Robin . . . actually wants to change, Lesley. And –

Lesley Would you like me to drive you back?

Jacqui No thank you.

Lesley It’s only a couple of minutes.

Jacqui No thank you.

Lesley I don’t mind.

Jacqui I can’t. I’m not read– and, it wouldn’t help him to –

Lesley I could bring you back, after.

Jacqui No. But thank you.

Lesley That’s all right. You’re welcome.



In the centre space. A firework goes off. And then another. And then more.

Jacqui leans in, watching from her room. Robin from his.

Robin Can you see them?

Jacqui Yes! YES! They’re beautiful! How did you . . . ?

Robin They’re um, from a box, you just, you just, light and run. Huh.

Jacqui So you went outside? Into your garden?

Robin I. Well. I. Yeah. I. Ran outside. And then, huh, and then ran back in.

Jacqui Robin, that’s . . . that’s amazing. Well done.

Robin Well. It’s your birthday in, (Checks his watch.) ooh, eleven minutes. So.

Jacqui Thank you. (Watches.) So that’s where you live. Over there.

Robin Yeah. Yeah, this is where I live.

So. What do you think? Give it a go?

Jacqui (pause) I’ve been doing. So well, Robin –

Robin Just to see. Just so I can show you. How it could work.

Pause.

Jacqui (smiles) OK.

Blackout on the rooms. The fireworks continue for a while, before fizzling out. . .



Jacqui in her room, glammed up in a dress. Robin in his house, wearing a suit. Each has half a dining table in their rooms, split at the cut-off point – two parts of the same whole. Candles are lit. Robin already has a plate of food at his table.

Jacqui (twirling) Well?

Robin You look amazing.

Knock at her bedroom. Jimmy stands holding a Thermos bag and a bottle of wine.

Jacqui And who could this be? (Answering.) Well, hello, sir.

Jimmy Good evening, madam. I will be your waiter for this evening. May I present to you your meal?

Jacqui Why, thank you. (Smelling.) Hmm, lovely.

Jimmy And. (Sprays her wrist with aftershave.) Your date wishes you to know how he smells this evening.

Jacqui (sniffing her wrist) Hmm, gorgeous. Wow. Very nice.

Jimmy The gentlemen also requested that I deliver this. (Kisses her on the cheek.) With his best wishes.

If you need anything just call and I’m only thirty to forty minutes away.

Jacqui Thanks, Jimmy.

Jimmy You look stunning.

Jimmy leaves. Jacqui goes to the table, removing a plate from the heat-sealed bag, removing the cling film, and sitting at the table with the wine. Robin also sits.

Robin Shall we?

Jacqui I can’t believe you cooked this, looks amazing.

Robin Is it still warm?

Jacqui I’m sure it’s fine.

Robin Wine?

Jacqui Thank you. Shall I pour myself?

Robin Uh, if you wouldn’t mind.

Jacqui There. (Tasting the food.) Mm. Mm. Wow. Well done you.

Robin ’S all right.

Jacqui It’s better than all right, stop putting yourself down.

Robin It’s nice not to just cook for one. For once. Happy birthday.

Jacqui So. How was your day at work today, darling, all right?

Robin Oh, fine. Fine. Got the first draft of my next book to the agent, you know. You?

Jacqui Oh, I decided to work from home today.

Robin Really?

Jacqui Hmm. So. When are you going to tell me about your new book?

Robin Ugh. Nah. I’ll only make it sound rubbish.

Jacqui No, you won’t. Come on.

Robin Really. Honestly. No. I, I don’t like . . . before it’s done, I –

Jacqui False modesty. What’s it called?

Robin (sighs) It, it’s called . . . no. OK. It’s called . . . (Pause. Sighs.) Poor Poor Pluto. And. It’s about . . . well, it’s, the characters are. Um. Are the planets. In the solar system. And (see I’m making it sound) . . . and, uh, Pluto. Is the main character. And all it is, is he gets told, by the others, that he isn’t a proper planet any more.

Jacqui Awh.

Robin Exactly. So. And he’s always been kind of skirting around on the peripheries of the, of the proverbial playground as it were anyway, but now. . . Well, officially he, it was downgraded to, erm . . . Well, and don’t read too much into this, but now I’ve said that, of course you’re going . . . uh, to a satellite. Huh. Coinc – oddly enough. Like the moon of something else. So condemned into a supporting role. Doing what satellites do. Orbiting around the main body. Watching. But never . . . getting involved. Just watching.

Jacqui Huh. Where do you get your ideas from? (Smiles.) I hope it’s a success for you.

Robin Y-we-ye-well . . . (Shh.) Thank you.

Music pumps out. Robin and Jacqui spin away their chairs, brush themselves down, face each other, and count themselves in. They begin a jive – despite the distance between them, they could almost be dancing together. They laugh and giggle but continue, mock-seriously. Finishing with a flourish.



Late night. Jacqui is sprawled on the bed. Robin in his room.

Jacqui You know, if the writing thing doesn’t work out, which I’m sure it will, but if it doesn’t, I reckon as a chef you’d do bloody well. Or even a professional dancer.

Robin Well, I’ll need a partner.

Jacqui You went to a lot of trouble.

Robin Not really.

Jacqui No, you did. (Beat. As mock-American girl.) ‘This was my bestest birthday ever!’

Robin Hmm.

Jacqui smells her wrist. Smiles. Smells it again.

Jacqui Well I’d invite you in for coffee, but . . .

Robin gasps playfully.

Jacqui But I’m not that kind of girl.

Robin And I’m not that kind of boy.

Jacqui Good. So. (Standing.) I guess . . . (Wobbling on her feet.) Whoop.

Robin You all right?

Jacqui Yep. Yep. These heels. It’s been a while.

Robin Oh, it’s the heels.

Jacqui Yes. It is. So. (Sighs.) So. I guess this is where we leave it.

Robin smiles weakly, and nods. Long, heavy pause.

Jacqui Thank you, Robin, for a . . . for a really nice birthday.

Robin Hmm . . .

It isn’t enough, is it?

Pause.

Jacqui It’s been a lovely / evening.

Robin It isn’t enough. Where from here, what next? Tomorrow? It isn’t enough. (Pause.) I . . . I don’t want to lose this.

Jacqui We don’t have to lose this. I just don’t think it can . . . I don’t think it can be anything more than this. If it is this. Do you see? I’m sorry.

Robin Then . . . then . . . then let’s . . . let’s do it.

Jacqui Do what?

Robin Let, let’s, let’s . . . let, let’s, let’s meet. I’ll, I’ll . . . I’ll meet you.

Jacqui What do you mean?

Robin Let’s do this. Let, let’s meet. I’ll, I can, I’ll l-l-leave. I’ll come to you. And you to me. And, and we’ll, we’ll. Meet.

Pause.

Jacqui You’ll . . . ?

Robin Let’s meet. Let’s just do it. Let’s just try, I’m . . . I’m willing to . . . (Shit!) I’ll try. Now. Soon, now.

Jacqui (beat; laughs) Seriously? What? No. Seriously?

Robin Yes?

Jacqui All right, then. (Beat; laughs.) Oh my God!

Robin (laughs; cries a bit; laughs) Shit.

Jacqui How? When? Oh my God, no. Really? No!

Robin Let’s – we need – let’s . . . I don’t know, find somewhere. Halfway between. But it, it has to be soon, otherwise, I’ll . . . shit. Jesus! Has to be soon. Has to be –

Jacqui Tomorrow?

Robin OK.

Pause. Jacqui squeals, excited and terrified.

Robin (laughs, drops to his knees, stands again) Oh God, oh God, oh shit, uh –

Jacqui But, but you, you haven’t been out in –

Robin Well, I, I, I, I . . . I could, I could do with the, the, huh, the Fresh Air. Uh . . .

Jacqui No. No, we’re going to wake up tomorrow and not do it. I know it.

Robin No.

Jacqui It’s because we’ve been drinking.

Robin No, no. I will. I want to. I can. I will. We just need to plan it.

Robin (speaking out, getting changed as he does) I don’t believe a word I’m saying. Just so you know. I’m just a bystander, watching the words come out my mouth, and thinking, ‘Christ, you’re on your own there, mate. Enjoy.’ And I’m just humouring him. But things get away from you, and once you’re in the thing, the carriage, and the bar comes down over your lap and you’re setting off up the roller coaster there isn’t much you can do, is there? Except scream your tits off, of course.



Jacqui in her room, changed to go out. Robin the same in his. He taps on his computer. On the screen at the back, a street map of the local area.

Jacqui You OK?

Robin No. You?

Jacqui No, not even a little bit.

Robin Good. At least we’re on the same page. Huh.

Jacqui Oh my God . . .

Robin I’ve got your mobile number, if there’s a problem, I’ll find, find a phone box. Do they still exist? Round here? Phone boxes?

Jacqui Uh, yeah, s’pose. Shit.

Robin So. One o’clock. Under the bridge. (Pointing at the map.) By the side of the park

Jacqui One o’clock. Under the bridge. One o’clock. That’s half an hour. That’s fine. Ha. Under the bridge. Strong, sturdy bridge.

Smiles nervously. Stops. Deep breath.

I w-wish you had a, a mobile.

Robin Nev – never needed one. (Attempting a jokey tone, but failing.) Plus they, they attract satellites, so . . . (Pause.)

Jacqui How do I look?

Robin Fine. Is it warm outside? This too much?

Jacqui Dunno. You got everything?

Robin I don’t . . . know what I need. Oh God.

Goes to be sick. Gags a bit. Gathers himself.

I’m. Sorry, if . . . if I don’t make it –

Jacqui Don’t. You will. Don’t say that. It’s just this first part that’s the worst. Once we’re out. Once we’re . . . maybe we should have done taxis.

Robin No! No, we – if we did that, then what? Get the taxis to take us back to one of ours and then what? Get them to wait, and take one of us back, and then . . . No, if we’re doing it, then . . . then we’re bloody –

Jacqui No, you’re right. (You’re right.) Huh. Just think in, in about five minutes’ time we’ll be as close to each other as we are to home.

Robin Yeah. Yeah. A bit like what the Russian army used to do.

Jacqui Is it?

Robin Yeah.

Jacqui Oh. That’s good then.

Robin Whenever they were invaded, from the west, they, they, the Russians, they’d retreat back. Back and back into their own country, sort of scorching the land as they, they went, so the enemy couldn’t get any food or shelter. And eventually they’d been lured so far in, the enemy were just too far from home to go back, but going forward there was just more, uh, more barren land, and so they were just kinda stuck.

Jacqui Oh. What happened, then?

Robin Well. They all, they all died. So.

Jacqui Oh. OK. ’S a good story.

Robin Thank you.

Jacqui My answer machine! Need to record a message, for the first time in . . . (Presses button on answer machine. It beeps.) Uh, hello, you’ve reached Jacqui’s phone. Um . . . ha-hard as it may be to believe, I’m actually out. So. So leave a message. Or call my mobile, erm. If, if you don’t have my mobile number then, uh . . . well, then, there’s a reason for that, thanks, bye. (Presses the button.) So-o-o . . .

Robin So. (Sighs heavily.) I do, I really do, erm . . . I really do think that, that I . . . Jacqui, I really do believe that in the past months I’ve started to fa – that I am in, in . . . or I least could be one day, in, in lo –

Jacqui Wait. Wait. Save it. For face to face.

Robin Face to face. (Nods.) Huh. Face to face. Just the thought of being able to . . . to touch you. Not, no, not in, in that –

Robin I didn’t mean –

Robin I mean . . . just . . . for you to just be real. For you to just be real.

Jacqui I’m going to turn you off now.

Robin No, wait, don’t, why?!

Jacqui I don’t want you to see me leave.

Robin What, no, I need to see you go otherwise –

Jacqui I need to . . . (Sighs.) ‘put’ something else on, but I don’t want you to see it –

Robin Don’t be silly, I –

Jacqui Fine! Just . . .

She retrieves a London beefeater’s hat and puts it on.

But don’t ask me why, it just makes me feel better. Protected. Better.

Robin I wish I had something. Oh.

He grabs an umbrella and shows her. They smile.

(Deep breath.) So.

Jacqui So. You could write about this one day. Our own little adventure story.

Jacqui One to tell you all. When we get back.

Robin Yeah. If it ends well.

Jacqui Course it will end well. How would it end?

Robin I dunno. How will it end?

Jacqui With a, a happy ending. I hope. In colour.

Robin Yeah. Course. Happy ending would be good.

Jacqui Under the bridge, one o’clock.

Robin Under the bridge. One o’clock. (Deep breath.) Later skater.

Jacqui (smiles) In a bit, shit.

Robin goes to his door. Jacqui to hers. They open them. Jacqui rests her head against the frame. Robin weakens and drops to his knees, but quickly struggles back up. Beat. They both bolt out, screaming, Robin opening the umbrella as he goes. . .



Dim lights up on Jacqui’s room. The phone rings. After a few seconds it goes to voicemail, and we hear the first moments of her recorded message.

Lights down.



Dim lights up on Jacqui’s room as she enters. She turns the light on.

She stands motionless for a while. She takes her shoes off. Tosses them down.

She looks over at Robin’s room, in semi-darkness still. . .

She notices the red light flashing on her machine. She presses play. It beeps.

Answering machine You have . . . one . . . message.

Lights down.



Robin’s house. Robin is sitting on the floor. Lesley sits nearby. Silence.

Lesley Did you have that casserole in the end? All right, was it?

Pause. Robin nods.

Lesley So you tried the path thing, then, did you? That’s what this is about?

Well, that’s wonderful, that is. Well done, love. How far did you get?

Robin End of the path.

Lesley Right to the end?

Robin And a bit further.

Lesley And a bit further?! To where?

Robin Past the tree.

Lesley Past the tree?! Well that’s wonderful, that is. Well done.

Robin It wasn’t wonderful.

Lesley Now don’t you put yourself down, Robin, don’t you put yourself down, that’s marvellous, that’s more than marvellous, that’s flippin’ miraculous, that, well done.

Robin I was meant to go further.

Lesley What happened?

Robin I was meant to go all the way to her.



Under the bridge.

Screaming, off. Getting closer.

Jacqui arrives at speed, wearing her beefeater hat. She hits the floor. She stands, still screaming, but now happy, giddy, jumping up and down, clapping and squealing.

Jacqui Argh – I – did – it, I bloody did it! I . . . I . . . argh!

She slowly gathers herself, and looks around for any sign of Robin. The distant sound of a phone ringing. The opening of Jacqui’s voicemail. . . as lights rise nearby on:



A phone box. Robin leaning against the side, catching his breath. Phone to his ear.

Even though he is clearly far apart from Jacqui, here they appear quite close. Robin is watching her. The message on Jacqui’s answer machine ends, followed by the beep.

Robin (speaking into the phone) Jacqui. (Jacqui.)

He leans out with the receiver, watching her. He rests his head against the side.

(Sighs.) I’m, erm . . . I’m in a phone box. And I can see you. You’re waiting for me.

I’m, um . . . uh . . . I’m, I’m so sorry. (Sighs. Groans.) I’m so sorry.

Uh, you see. What’s happened is. (What’s happened is.)

The line beeps. He inserts coins.

Erm. Ha. I got here! I got here, isn’t that – I didn’t think I would and I nearly didn’t but I did and it was hell, it was hell on earth, but I did, and I just kept running and I got here and . . . and I was afraid. I was really – but I . . . for as long as I can remember, I’ve been afraid. Uh, which isn’t good. Huh. Erm. It isn’t good to be, to be this afraid. Of things. I don’t think. But, but being brave, as I understand it, being brave . . . it, it doesn’t mean not being afraid, it means doing it, doing it in spite of being . . . I’m rambling, now, the point is. Jacqui. Huh.

The point. Is.

That I’ve been so focused on, on . . . on things falling from the sky and, and beating that . . . (Pause.) I’m sorry. What am I saying? I’m saying. That there’s something more frightening now than, than falling satellites.

The line beeps. He inserts coins.

It’s been such a long time. Since anyone. Um. Cared about me, uh, in that way. If, if ever. And I, uh . . . I suppose I’m a little bit concerned about that now. Actually. Huh. That ‘responsibility’. Um. Of, of being . . . Worth It. And seeing you here. Standing only, only yards away. Well. You’re real. And. Erm. And I’m not sure I can handle that. I’m a, a . . . huh . . . I’m a bystander, Jacqui. It, that’s all I know. (That’s all I know.)

He leans his head against the side. Hits his head against the side. Comes back up.

You. Wouldn’t, uh . . . you wouldn’t like me. In real life. Very much, I’m . . . I’m not one of those kinds of people that people really like. And I don’t want to, to, lose . . . the thing we had. But, you know like all good things . . . well, you know, what, what goes up. Eh? (What goes up.)

He makes to replace the receiver, but stops, looking at Jacqui again.

Robin You, you really do look . . . really very good, though. You know. In the face.

So good I, I can hardly breathe, actually.

The line beeps. He makes to replace the receiver, but has a quick beat.

Oh and, uh, I love you.

He replaces the receiver. He watches Jacqui. He looks up at the sky, and exits at speed. Jacqui stands waiting under the arch. The lights fade out on her. Blackout.



Robin’s room. Robin on the floor. Lesley seated.

Lesley You know, me and your dad could never find one another. We’d always be like magnets that repulsed – repel? Repelled each other. I remember one time I lost him in Asda. He’d always go wandering off, and so I call him on his mobile and we’re trying to work out where the other one is and it only turns out we’re standing bloody next to each other. Right there, by the fish fingers. So it just goes to show.

Pause.

What’s that in your hand?

Robin A letter.

Lesley For her? You gonna post it?

Robin I’ve got a courier coming round.

Lesley Tell her yourself. I could drive you round.

Robin It’s cheating. And I wouldn’t . . . I wouldn’t know what to do when I got there.

Lesley It’s the same for everyone. A step into the unknown. Reminds me of / when –

Robin I know what’s . . .

Lesley Oh, sorry, go on.

Robin I know what’s ahead of me – scorched earth.

Lesley Scorched earth?

Robin Like what the Russians did.

Lesley Like what the Russians did?

Robin Mum, you’re doing it again.

Lesley What did the Russians do, though, love? Sorry.

Robin To the advancing enemy – burn the land. So that when they’re so far in, they’re trapped. All that’s behind them is scorched land. All that’s ahead of them is scorched land. All that’s around them is scorched frigging land . . .

Lesley And what did they do?

Robin (shrugs) Carried on.

Silence. Lesley clearly thinking about this. . .

Lesley Well. You would do. Wouldn’t you?

Robin (pause) What?

Lesley You would carry on. Wouldn’t you? Because you, you know what’s behind you, don’t you? Nothing. Because you’ve seen it. And you know what’s around you now, nothing again, because you can see it. And even if you are pretty sure the exact same thing is ahead of you, well . . . no point in going back or staying still, is there? At least in front there’s the slightest bit of. Hope.

Beat. Robin looks up at his mum. . .



Jacqui in her room. Later. She’s facing Robin’s house, which is now in darkness.

Jacqui Hello? (Pause.) Robin? (Pause.) I got your message. (Pause.) Are you there? (Pause.) I do. Understand. You know. It hurts, and I’m disappointed, and I’m lying, I’m more than that, I’m . . . but I can’t not see you again. Even though I can’t forgive you, I can’t lose whatever small part of you I had. So please if you’re . . . How can you say I wouldn’t like you very much? I . . . ? (Struggling.) You’ve broken my heart . . .

A knock on the door. Jimmy calls out, off.

Jimmy (off) Courier.

Jacqui Is this from you? Whatever it is, it won’t be enough.

Jacqui answers the door. Jimmy is there, dressed in out-of-work clothes.

Jimmy Hey Jacqui.

Jacqui You’re working late.

Jimmy I’m not actually meant to be working. But I thought I’d make this one last drop.

Jimmy leads Robin in. Wearing a helmet. Silence. Jacqui stares. Robin is trembling.

Jimmy Sign for it?

Beat. Bewildered, Jacqui signs her name. Jimmy smiles, and exits, closing the door. They stare at each other. Both are shaking. Silence. Jacqui tries for normality.

Jacqui I, I . . . just left you a, a message.

Robin Y– yeah? What . . . saying what?

Jacqui That you. Broke my heart. Huh.

Robin Oh. OK.

Jacqui I didn’t mean it.

Robin (shrugs) Even a broken heart is right twice a day.

Jacqui . . .

Robin (looks around) This is . . . st-strange, being . . . ’S like walking on to the set of a, of a film. You’ve seen. Lots of times.

Jacqui Huh.

Robin Smaller.

Jacqui It is small.

Robin No, but I mean, it feels. . . from watching . . . through the, um . . .

Jacqui (tries to smile, but struggling; beat) How was the, the, journey –?

Robin I screamed all the way.

Jacqui Right. Yes.

Robin No, but I mean, he’s a good driver, Jimmy.

Jacqui Good.

Robin Has a little, uh . . . sat-nav thing. On his bike.

Jacqui Huh.

Robin Brings people together, now. Apparently. ’Stead of keeping them apart.

Long pause.

I am going to make . . . So Many Mistakes. In this. But if you’re OK with that. Then that’s OK . . .

Jacqui (pause) Would you like a cup of tea? Or something?

Robin A cup of tea would be amazing. Thank you.

Jacqui This is very strange.

Robin It is strange.

Jacqui It’s like having a stranger in my room. Like Darren Connolly.

Robin Darren Connolly?

Jacqui The last boy I had up here. Only it’s not like that.

Robin Right.

Jacqui Because you’re like a person I know.

Robin Right.

Jacqui Like the person I know most about in the world who knows most about me but who I’ve never met.

Robin Well. Let’s meet.

He holds out his hand.

Hi. I’m Robin.

Jacqui (beat; holds out her hand) Jacqui.

They hold each other’s hand – and look down at them. Slightly overcome by the touch.

Jacqui It’s ‘U’ and ‘I’. At the end.

Robin I’m so glad.

Lights down.





The Whisky Taster





Cast List


The Whisky Taster was first performed at the Bush Theatre, London, on 26 January 2010. The cast was as follows:

Barney

Christopher

Malcolm

Nicola

The Whisky Taster

Samuel Barnett

Chris Larkin

Simon Merrells

Kate O’Flynn

John Stahl



Director James Grieve

Designer Lucy Osborne

Lighting Designer James Farncombe

Sound Designer Emma Laxton

Assistant Director Ant Stones

Company Stage Manager Angela Riddell





Characters


Barney, male, mid to late twenties, North Midlands

Nicola, female, mid to late twenties, South London

The Whisky Taster, male, seventies, Scottish

Malcolm, male, forties, English

Chris, male, forties

Scott, voice only





A note on the text


A slash mark (/) indicates the character that speaks next should begin their line.

An ellipsis (. . .) indicates hesitation. A dash (–) indicates a change in thought or broken speech.

(Text in brackets) indicates a line spoken almost privately, to oneself, but still aloud (just).





A note on ‘characters’


Both Nicola and Barney sometimes speak through fictional characters or in voices they have created, generally stereotypes, including ‘Charles and Timothy’ – city bankers; or ‘Keith and Barry’ – cockney geezers.





A note on synaesthesia


A neurological condition where those afflicted can feel ‘sensations’ towards colours, shapes and patterns, or project colours onto objects such as days and emotions.





Act One




Scene One


The rooftop terrace of an advertising agency, central London. Distant sound of traffic below. The only colours evident are black, white and grey.

Barney and Nicola stand apart, facing each other. Nicola smokes. Barney wears a thick coat, his hands tucked into his pockets.

Barney Hope it does.

Nicola What?

Barney Snow.

Nicola Do you? I don’t, hate it.

Barney Cold enough.

Nicola You’d die, left out in the cold, you. Nothing on you.

Barney I like it. Don’t like / being too hot.

Nicola Them little knees of yours, knocking together.

Barney Thank you.

Nicola (giggles) Knobbliest knees I’ve ever seen, yours are.

Barney Oy, don’t.

Nicola What?

Barney ‘What’? Having a go at me knees. I’m / sensitive about –

Nicola What? You have got skinny legs, Barn.

Barney Why you telling me that?

Nicola Good thing, that. / For some people.

Barney I know I’ve got skinny legs, I see ’em every day. What people?

Nicola Girls.

Barney Well I’m not / a girl, am I?

Nicola Some girls’d kill for them legs. I’d kill for ’em. And your figure, pretty much.

Barney I . . . it – I don’t know how to respond to that, Nicola.

Nicola Compliment.

Barney Bollocks was it.

Nicola Was. Oy.

Barney ‘You’ve got legs like a little girl’?

Nicola I didn’t say ‘little girl’, you did. I said you’ve got little legs, like a girl, / so don’t –

Barney I can’t believe we’re still talking about it. I can’t believe I’m up here listening to you bully me, freezing my tits off, while you have a fag.

Nicola What the fuck is wrong with you? Wrong side of the what’s-it / or fucking what?

Barney Nothing. Hate Mondays.

Nicola What?

Barney Hate Mondays.

Nicola Uh, that’s original.

Barney Uh, not trying to be original. Just saying.

Nicola (beat while she smokes) All right then, Picasso. Do it. What’s Mondays?

Barney (beat; shrugs) I don’t . . . not all the same, is it, morning’s different to –

Nicola (mock big sigh) Oh. OK. Well, what is right now, Monday?

Barney Dunno, it’s . . . I can’t . . . It might be a bit . . . dunno. / Lilac?

Nicola How long we got? – what? / Lilac.

Barney Lilac. Yeah. But it . . . like, fades in and out. Tastes a bit . . . What was – shit, what were them awful purple, pink, sweets you used to get? Like Refreshers but not. Taste like soap, or potpourri (pronounced as ‘pot-puree’) or –

Nicola Parma violets.

Barney Parma violets! / Yuk, hate them.

Nicola What, what did you just say? ‘Pot’ . . . did you pronounce it ‘pot-puree’? / It’s –

Barney What?

Nicola It’s potpourri, idiot. (Laughs.) How did . . . ? / Potpourri?

Barney That’s how it’s spelt.

Nicola I don’t care how it’s fucking spelt, that’s not how it’s fucking said; / ‘potpourri’.

Barney Well, anyway.

Nicola Amazing. Not like you, / getting words wrong –

Barney Whatever, I was talking, I thought we were / just talking –

Nicola We are talking, we are just talking; fine, lilac. Fine. Bit like my shirt, / yes?

Barney It’s ‘kind of’ lilac. Monday morning. Be something else by this afternoon. Normally turns yellow into green, or . . . (Shrugs.)

Nicola (referencing her white shirt) Actually it’s more pink, this, isn’t it? Oh I dunno, whatever. Not sending you funny or nothing?

Barney I have. Ways of. Controlling it. Sort of.

Nicola How?

Barney By not . . . I just. Like I just try not to think about it. About your shirt being . . . the colour it is. I just kind of. Delete it. And instead there’s just a . . . an empty space where colour should be. That way I don’t start getting all the, erm . . . Feeling. Things. So . . .

Nicola I don’t like lilac, actually, makes me feel old. Funny, innit? What’s Friday’s then? I like Fridays –

Barney Nick, I . . . don’t . . .

Nicola All right, all right. (Smokes.) God, feel like I’m going all funny now. Nervous.

Barney We’ll be fine. (Beat.) Can’t believe you had a go at my knees.

Nicola Jesus.

Barney Don’t hear me saying anything about . . . your . . .

Nicola What?

Barney Your . . . I dunno, just –

Nicola No, ‘anything about my’ what?

Barney I can’t think of anything.

Nicola Aww. Liar.

Barney Seriously.

Nicola So I’m perfect, am I? Perfect in every single way?

Nicola spins playfully. Barney shifts and stamps his feet. Nicola smokes.

Nicola You don’t strike me as someone who does well in the cold, Barney, is all I’m saying. Is all I was Ob-Serv-Ing. OK?

Barney Still like it when it snows, though. I like it when I’m inside and I’m looking outside And It Is Snowing.

Nicola Well, it’s cold enough. I bet it does.

Barney I hope it does.

Nicola Nobody up here, this morning. Never happens.

Barney (wrapping his jacket tighter) Not surprised, fucking hell.

Nicola See. You’re going blue. I like your jacket, though. / Incidentally.

Barney Oh. Really?

Nicola Yeah, where’d you get it from?

Barney Dunno, don’t remember.

Nicola (groans) Don’t mean you’re gay. Barney, just ’cause you remember where you get your clothes from.

Barney I don’t remember because I bought it last year. It’s last year’s winter coat.

Nicola That’s a bit of a faux pas, innit? Gonna get a new one?

Barney You just said you liked this one.

Nicola (smokes) We’d be about the first to know. I reckon. Up here. If it snowed. ’Bout the first to know in the whole of London, nearly. ‘The first flakes’.

Barney You about done with that? He’s coming in at three, need to prepare.

Nicola We are prepared. Chillax.

Barney Don’t say that.

Nicola (mock-Northern) ‘Don’t say that’. (Smokes. Looks behind his shoulder.) You know Centre Point. If it fell over. Kind of. Would it hit us?

Barney (glancing behind. Disinterested.) I. Dunno.

Nicola If it tipped like that. (Demonstrates.) Straight.

Barney I don’t think so. / I don’t think that’s –

Nicola But if it did fall like that.

Barney I don’t think that’s how buildings fall. If you look at –

Nicola I know, but (fuck), I know, but if it did, fall straight, would it hit us?

Barney No.

Nicola (smokes) Heard Malcolm’s gonna decide about Mumbai this week.

Barney Really?

Nicola Can’t believe he’s not just taking it. Idiot. That job; why wouldn’t you?

Barney Wish he was, Jesus Christ, imagine that. Him a thousand miles away, leaving / us to just . . .

Nicola ’S ’cause he’s worried about not being here, I’ll bet. The Execs fucking him over, getting rid.

Barney Just gossip, it’s all bollocks.

Nicola (as Barry) Someone’s gonna be jumpin’ into his shoes, know what I’m mean, you get what I’m saying, kiddo?

Barney (as Keith) Jump in his grave as quick, would cha, fuckin’ ’ell, love, blimey.

Nicola (smiles; smokes) Well. People talk. About you. One day. You know they do,

Barney No they . . . as if I’d, as if I’d ever wanna be stuck in his . . . like some . . .

Nicola Well. Whoever he picks for Mumbai, fuck me. What a dream. Just ‘imaj’ (imagine).

Barney Could be you, never know.

Nicola Oh OK, Barney, yeah, they’d give me my own team, my own fucking . . . brand new –

Barney Don’t know why they’re not picking two. Why would they want to split a pair up?

Nicola Well, I don’t wanna think about it, no point. Besides, if it’s either of us then it’d be bloody you, wouldn’t it? So . . . there you go. What if it is you? Drive you nuts out there, wouldn’t it?

Barney I don’t . . . It’s . . . I’m not even / sure I’d . . .

Nicola Have you seen Slumdog Millionaire? You’d have an eppy.

Barney (checking his watch) Are you nearly done?

Nicola Chillax. / ‘Don’t say that!’

Barney Don’t say that . . . (Fucking Nora.)

Nicola (smokes) Had my second fitting at the weekend, Barney-boy. Looking good. You still bringing Joanne?

Barney looks at his feet as he stamps them.

Nicola Barn, you –?

Barney I thought the silence might be enough to imply that I wasn’t.

Nicola Oh. What happened?

Barney Nothing.

Nicola When?

Barney Friday night.

Nicola What was it?

Barney Well, technically Saturday morning. But it was, uh . . . you know. Set in motion. Friday night.

Nicola Mutual?

Barney Yes. No. More me. But . . .

Nicola She was a lovely girl, Barney. Really pretty.

Barney I didn’t love her.

Nicola You didn’t try.

Barney You shouldn’t have to try.

Nicola You never try.

Barney You shouldn’t have to, Nick. (You shouldn’t have to.)

Nicola singes the end of her fag with her lighter flame while she speaks, even though it doesn’t need relighting. (A common trait.)

Nicola Parma frickin’ violets. Yeah man. Would always have a couple rattling round the pockets of my blazer at school. Along with all sorts of shit. ‘Laggie’ bands. Ah-uh. You know at home, after school, did you watch CBBC or CITV?

Barney CITV. Always. Better.

Nicola Nah. CBBC. Grange Hill. Blue Peter.

Barney CITV to start with, then flick over for Byker Grove.

Nicola No way, Jose. CITV was a bag of wank.

Barney Er, Fun House?

Nicola Only one, though. Jesus, Fun House!

Barney Saw him at uni, Pat Sharp. Came and did a night or something.

Nicola ‘Ooh I’m Barney, I went to uni.’

Barney mock-sighs and Nicola imitates him with an even louder mock-sigh as Barney does a louder one back. They smile. They do this a lot.

Nicola (singing) ‘Fun House! It’s a whole lot of fun! / Prizes to be won!’

Barney (singing) ‘Prizes to be won.’

Nicola (singing) ‘It’s a real crazy show where anything can go!’ (Smokes.) Megadrive or SNES?

Barney SNES.

Nicola Knew you’d say that.

Barney So. Knew you’d be Sega, so . . .

Nicola Yeah. Better.

Barney Except that it wasn’t, though.

Nicola Well, was, though, so . . .

Barney Sonic was shit.

Nicola What?!

Barney You could never see where you . . . just tap some, some buttons really hard and somehow you bounce your way to the end of the level. / What the –?

Nicola ‘Oh. I’m Mario. I go about one mile an hour. Hop. Walk. Hop. Walk. Oh no, a mushroom. Because I’m a plumber with a mushroom deficiency, for no reason . . . ’

Barney Not defic – It’s an allergy. Deficiency means you need more, not less.

Nicola (mock-Northern) ‘Ee, deficiency means you need more not less.’

Barney Why does your impression always sound so . . . ‘exhausted’?

Nicola ’Cause that’s what northerners sound like. ‘After a day down t’ pit.’

Barney Well. I’m not Northern. I’m . . . Mansfield’s Midlands. Technically. North Midlands.

Nicola Potato patarto. Where does the north start, then?

Barney It – I dunno. Yorkshire, maybe.

Nicola How far’s that from you?

Barney Like . . . twenty minutes, or –

Nicola There you go. Good as. (Checks her watch.) Fuck, better get down.

Barney I told you.

Nicola (mock-Northern) ‘I told yer’. (Beat.) Oy. Don’t be weird.

Barney Don’t be . . . what? Don’t be –

Nicola You know. Don’t be the ‘you’ that’s weird. Be the ‘you’ that’s ‘gifted’. Just today.





Scene Two


Meeting room. Black, white and grey.

A table. A pot plant in the corner. Barney, Nicola and Malcolm.

Malcolm fiddles with his phone a lot, so his level of distraction varies while talking. Nicola occasionally rearranges a bottle of vodka and some glasses on the table.

Malcolm Brown?

Nicola Yeah, isn’t he, Barn? On your face.

Malcolm Really? God that’s funny; rained the whole time.

Nicola Oh did it? Oh no.

Malcolm That’s the . . . ha ha, that’s the thing, what I kept trying to tell everyone when they . . . Everyone’s all like, ‘Uh ner-ner, India over Christmas, lucky you,’ and I was a just a bit like, ‘Erm, what? Sorry, no, it’s cold, and, basically the same as here, and, I’m looking . . . ’ (Laughs.) You know, wandering around office blocks and fucking . . .

Nicola But good, though?

Malcolm Yeah, no, no, no, yeah, good. Really good. Really great place. You two all set, then? Annoying that he’s late, but I wouldn’t / expect anything less.

Nicola Yeah, we’re good to go, aren’t we Barney.

Malcolm Big one, this one. Be really . . . not to be all (mock screams) ‘aargh, pressure’. Huh. But, uh. But yes. If we get this, really great. Great for all of us, the company, you know, good for me, huh, my contact, certainly good for you. You pair. So . . .

Nicola No, we know, don’t worry, Malcolm. We’re on it. I’m leading the spiel this time.

Malcolm Y . . . right. (Slight beat.) Oh, right, you are?

Nicola Yeah, my turn.

Malcolm OK.

Nicola (pause) What’s the place again? Me and Barn tried to Google Earth it, but –

Malcolm Chakala, it’s called. / ‘C-h-a . . . ’

Nicola Chakala.

Malcolm Yeah, like North-West Mumbai, it’s . . . a lot of IT companies and, erm . . . (Phone starts to ring.) Those call centres, you know. (Oh God, what do you want?) (Answers.) Hello? (Waits.) Hel –? (Hangs up.) Fuck it. Erm. So yeah. Lucky boy or girl, whoever gets to run the show over there.

Nicola Exciting.

Malcolm Yeah, no, it is. And what with advertising here having been so . . . the past year, just, Jesus, whereas over there, it’s just, the, the pace it’s moving at, it’s gonna be –

Nicola Really? Is it?

Malcolm – brilliant. Yeah. And you know, look, new decade now, and all that, plan for the future of the company. With you guys. (Gestures them ‘grandly’.) ‘The future’. Huh. (Looks at his watch. Sighs.) Come on, getting silly now.

Nicola (rearranging the table) So there’s nothing else we need to know? About Chris? Christopher?

Malcolm Uh, Chris. Actually, no, Christopher. Oh, I don’t fucking know. But no, he’s all right. Can be a little bit, erm . . . but he’s all right. Honestly didn’t really know him that well, thought he was a bit of a Hoorah to be honest. Always felt like he thought he belonged at Oxford or . . . had a thing up his . . . about red-bricks; I mean, it was fucking Manchester for God’s . . . Hardly erm . . . What do we even call this one? Decade. The teens? Or what? The . . . ? The ‘noughties’ never really took off, did it, as a name?

Nicola I completely didn’t realise we were in a new decade, for ages.

Malcolm I know. / Strange, wasn’t it?

Nicola Think it was Barney / that told me.

Malcolm Remember, like, ’89 – well, you two probably . . . and ’99, everyone looking back, defining everything, that, that kind of distinction between . . . but no, this one, no one really talked about it. It’s like we’re too old now. Ha ha. Can’t be doing with celebrating. Or something. Or maybe we just didn’t feel like it. This time. Maybe we just –

Chris enters, offering his hand.

Chris Malcolm.

Malcolm (shaking) Hey, Chris, you old devil, / how you doing?

Barney / Nicola Hello.

Chris Oh, God, I’m so sorry, bloody . . . taxis / round here just –

Malcolm No, that’s all right. D’you get offered a tea or coffee / on your way up?

Chris No, I’m fine. Fine.

Malcolm Uh, this is Nicola. / ‘One half’.

Nicola (shaking his hand) Hello, all right?

Chris Yes.

Malcolm And Barney. Other half of the dream team.

Barney Hello.

Chris I’m very sorry. Everything just / overrunning, you know.

Nicola Oh God, no, / don’t be silly.

Chris The first one goes over and then it . . . / you know. Knock-on effect.

Nicola It happens. Please. (Offering the seat.) Where have you just come from? Not far.

Chris Well. I . . . Well, I can’t really say, can I, so . . .

Nicola Oh.

Chris Well, let me put it this way. Today is our . . . uh, you know, what would you – our ‘assault’ on marketing.

Nicola Right.

Chris We’re looking to invite three of the agencies we meet to pitch a campaign and unless, huh . . . well, unless you want me to give you the name of your competitors, the people competing with you for this contract –

Nicola God, no no no. I –

Chris Well it wouldn’t be very discreet would it? If I told you where I’d been.

Nicola Of course not, no. Absolutely.

Barney Would you like a drink or anything?

Chris No, thank you.

Nicola They reckon it might snow later.

Chris Really? Well, I’m just back from Minsk, so . . .

Nicola (laughs) Right. Well.

Chris You know. The snow there is . . .

Nicola I can imagine.

Chris Exactly. So . . .

Nicola Well. Um. Well. First off, we love it. (Chuckles.)

Barney (chuckles) Yes.

Chris Good.

Nicola I mean we would say that, of course. We want the job, but . . .

Chris And you’re young, too.

Nicola Ha.

Chris Beer out of an ashtray and all that. Ah-uh. / But, um . . .

Malcolm (knowingly playful) Well, we were there once, Chris, need I remind.

Chris I’ve no idea what’s he’s talking about, I was a model student. Malcolm, shush.

Nicola Ah-ah, OK. Erm, so, but yeah, we really do love this. We, both of us, after tasting it, just thought, ‘wow’, / so much different to –

Barney So fresh and clean and –

Nicola Yeah, exactly, fresh and crisp, we said, and clean, and so . . . Our thoughts are . . . For the reason being, erm, well if you, for example, often if you position something as a classier product, and then after an initial period deposition it entirely – we’re talking like over a two, three-year campaign, then –

Barney It’s a strategy that we’ve seen work time and again mainly in rebranding –

Nicola Right, a brand repositions itself higher, makes itself exclusive, a sense of, erm, of, like, the unattainable, so that when you deposition to the mainstream, open it up to everyone, people flock, because they’re grateful.

Barney Marks and Spencer’s. Classic example; they were lingering in the, the depths of, of scuzziness, and so repositioned themselves too high, out of the woman on the street’s reach, and then gradually began opening out again.

Nicola We’re seeing it happen now with Waitrose, it’s happened a bit with Prada. / It’s –

Chris Right, but –

Nicola Sorry?

Chris Right, but . . . we’re not rebranding, are we? We haven’t even launched yet. / You can’t, you know, you can’t change people’s mind about something they haven’t even . . .

Nicola Yeah, exactly, fresh and crisp, we said, and clean, and so . . . Our thoughts are . . . we wondered about pitching this to a slightly higher demographic than you kind of indicated at in your brief. For the reason being, erm, we think the problem with vodka over here, the way it’s marketed and –

Barney And the way it’s consumed –

Nicola And the way it’s consumed, particularly the way it’s consumed. If you go into any off-licence you’ll see literally a whole shelf of very cheap-looking, cheap-tasting, uh, um, ‘I’m not-buying-it-for-the-taste-it’s-just-to-get-me-fucked’ kind of vodkas. All branded in those same colours, conjuring up all those images of . . . of . . .

Barney Of wrong side of the wall, communist, / hammer and sickle –

Nicola Yeah, Russia. Cold, industrial, really cold Russia. So what we’re actually . . . I suppose what we’re saying is that we don’t just want to rebrand your vodka, we want to rebrand vodka using yours as the, as the spearhead. Or –

Barney A lot of young people, young British people, don’t buy expensive vodka. Why? Because they don’t think of vodka as something you buy for the taste. Necessarily. It isn’t wine or, or, or brandy, there’s no culture of sampling it, enjoying different brands.

Nicola It’s a social thing.

Barney It’s stigma. It’s –

Nicola You mix it with Coke, lemonade. Or make it taste like vanilla. Chocolate. It’s a shot before you hit the town. For depressed tramps, for . . . for Bridget Jones in between the bits with the men. But this? It’s just . . . it’s really fucking good. Sorry. But it is.

Barney It’s too good. We think. For that. This is vodka . . . at, like, a dinner-party vodka.

Nicola Sat-out-in-the-garden kind of vodka, or while reading a book. Opera vodka.

Barney And that’s how we would identify our campaign. Creeping into the public consciousness gradually.

Nicola So no huge full-page ads, bus banners, magazine inserts, nothing above urinals.

Barney Spend a fortune on a TFL package? Get on every tube, every line? It’s a waste. Domination packages, brand an entire station?

Nicola No. Truly classy things don’t shout at people. They whisper. Sorry to sound all Hoxton Square wanky, but . . .

Barney Nothing generic. Specific. Targeted. / Direct.

Nicola Direct. Exactly. And our analytics department is . . . well, it’s what really puts us ahead of other agencies.

Barney So for example, once we pin our demographic down, we could tell you instantly that for, say, London Transport, we’d be best spending more on Victoria and Jubilee.

Nicola Just sheer statistics. Just, it’s, you know, / it’s facts, just facts.

Barney Maybe Piccadilly. I wouldn’t think on the Northern Line –

Chris People . . . sorry. People don’t drink vodka on the Northern Line?

Barney Well, no they do, and that’s the problem. / Actually on –

Nicola Actually on the fucking Northern Line.

Barney Phase Two, we can start thinking about banner ads in newspapers –

Nicola Like the Guardian, / maybe the Telegraph –

Barney Further down the line, TV, say Sky Arts, say uh –

Nicola Film Four –

Barney But for now, forget it. Better a, a, like a guerrilla viral campaign, plant a few agents provocateurs on Twitter, setting up Facebook fan groups, begin to whip up a buzz without having to spend barely a penny, reducing your budget and also, over time, if we’re brave enough, see an increase in integrity and sales. Win win.

Chris (beat) OK. Well. Obviously, you know, Malcolm’s portfolio speaks for itself and it’s an . . . an interesting idea. (Thinks.) I have to say, though . . . hmm . . .

Nicola Go on, it’s all right.

Chris A ‘luxury’ . . . a luxury item? I just think, you know, in these times of, of, huh, downturn and depression, isn’t making yourself seem luxurious and / sort of –

Nicola No, OK, I do see / your point, but –

Chris I mean, ha, I’m glad you like it so much but –

Malcolm We all like it, Chris. I think / that’s what Nicola –

Chris But to make it ‘exclusive’, you know. That seems to be / risking potential –

Nicola It is a slightly, yeah, nerve-wracking proposition, sure, but it’s what we do, and, and with us, our digital and print production, that’s all done in-house / so there’s no –

Chris We-ell, so are most of the major agencies / I’ve been –

Nicola And the colours! Barney.

Chris The . . . what’s that?

Nicola The campaign colours. As an example. Barn? (Holds a glass of vodka out.)

Chris Oh. Well. We kind of already have our colours from the Baltic launch –

Nicola No, trust me. He is brilliant at this.

Chris Well, as I –

Nicola Barney?

Barney (unsure; takes the glass; sips; beat; solemnly) Blue . . . silver . . . and gold.

Chris (long pause; studies Barney.) That . . . that’s perfect. . .

Nicola Told you.

Chris Thank you. Well. Erm. Yes, I mean, yes, of course, no question that we’ll be wanting you to present to us a campaign. Uh –

Nicola Aw, brilliant, / cool. Thank you.

Malcolm Thank you, Chris, that’s great, / we’d be delighted.

Chris Yeah, well, why don’t you guys collect your ideas and things together and, let’s say, what, week today, give us the lowdown?

Malcolm No problem at all, look / forward to it.

Chris Sorry it all feels a little quick, / it’s just that –

Malcolm Oh God, not at all, no. Barney? Could you . . . show Chris –

Barney (going) Oh, yes, of . . . Uh, it, this way. Please.

Malcolm Bloody good to see you again.

Chris You too. (To Nicola.) Bye.

Nicola Bye.

Barney and Chris exit.

Malcolm So. Well done you.

Nicola Oh. Well. Well done you. And Barney.

Malcolm So you reckon you’ll lead on the campaign then, or . . . ?

Nicola Uh, dunno, me and Barney’ll talk about it. Doesn’t really matter, we say ‘lead’, but, you know, with us two, like all the teams, / it’s always –

Malcolm Yeah. Yeah, sure.

How does . . . It is incredible, isn’t it? Barney. Every time. How does he do it?

Nicola I don’t know.

Malcolm Because it’s clearly a thing, isn’t it? It’s clearly a real thing that . . . you know.

Nicola Oh yeah, it’s a proper what’s-it. He had a scan and everything. That’s why I don’t like asking, do you know what I mean; don’t like asking him to do it. Reckon it hurts him a bit or something.

Malcolm What, like . . . (beat) What, do you mean that’s not him . . . that’s not even him going at full speed, kind of thing?

Nicola Oh, no, no. He tries to keep a lid on it. That’s why I don’t like asking.

Malcolm So . . . so he could potentially be even more . . . ?

Nicola I dunno.

Malcolm Because . . . huh, you know, like I say, Nick, this one . . . we could really do with getting this one. Ahuh. And if there’s anything that we could do. Anything you could do. As team leader this round. You know. Be good opportunity, actually, for you. What with the Mumbai job coming up and everything. Nice little chance, well deserved. At last.

Nicola R-right. (Beat. Laughs, but tries not to.) Erm. Right. OK.

Malcolm Yeah?

Nicola Yeah.

Malcolm (kind of mock-go-getting) So we gonna win this one?

Nicola Fuck a duck, yeah.

Malcolm Great. That’s fucking awesome.

Barney returns.

Malcolm Whey, and speak of the devil.

Nicola All right?

Barney Yeah.

Malcolm Nice work, Barney, good on you. Both of you. Excellent. So. Debrief. Thoughts? Thoughts on what seemed to land, what didn’t? Let’s really push this idea, yeah? Really ask questions of it, no surprises on the day, OK? I had some . . . ‘thoughts’, if –

Nicola OK.

Malcolm (beat; thinks) I mean. ‘You’. What . . . what makes you drink? Do you think?

Nicola (pause) Erm . . .

Malcolm Because you do, don’t you? Don’t you? Sorry, this isn’t a, a, a . . . Huh, I suppose I’m just saying, just asking . . . because you do. People your age. More than nearly anyone ever, and . . . I just wonder whether it would be helpful to . . . ‘ask’ that.

Nicola Yeah. Yeah. Erm . . . OK.

Malcolm Let’s, OK, let’s go back a step. The demographic, this idea of it being, uh, top end, of . . . this luxury thing, some of which he seemed to get, other times . . . mmm – less so. I just wonder whether we’re missing a trick.

Nicola OK.

Malcolm I just wonder whether . . . because it’s the one thing, in this age of, in this time of economic . . . it’s the one thing that is sustain – not only sustaining itself, flourishing, amongst you lot, because . . . well. You’re still rich, aren’t you? By the standards of . . . and your disposable income, it ain’t going on houses, is it, because you can’t. Or savings, because . . . so, you know, fuck, you just . . . (Mimes necking a glass.) Huh. So I just wonder whether a ‘nice’ – and it is – a ‘nice’ vodka couldn’t benefit you lot. Dare I say, benefit you a lot more. Instead of it being out of your reach. If that . . .

Nicola OK. OK, I do see what you’re saying.

Malcolm It’s just, I’m just chucking things in. You know.

Nicola No, no, no, yeah. I think it’s just that –

Barney I think because instead of being something you ‘need’, something to, erm . . . ‘down’ in order to distract you from . . . I think we thought of it as more –

Nicola Aspirational.

Barney In a way, yeah. It –

Nicola Not that ‘we’re fucked’, instead more, more . . . more ‘it can be better’. ‘We can be better’. ‘Than this’.

Malcolm OK. I have some doubts, but if you think so, then . . . then go for it. Let me see it.

Nicola Coolio. All right. Well in that case, I’m gonna go and check on something.

Barney What?

Nicola Little surprise for you, Barn. Something I’ve been thinking about. Or someone. For tomorrow. Or not, depending. If I’ve got time. Catch you in a sec.

Nicola hops off, checking her watch. Barney smiles at Malcolm and makes to go too.

Malcolm Yeah, actually Barney, I couldn’t just . . . for a minute? Could I?

Barney Uh, yeah. Course.

Malcolm (pause) How are you?

Barney (pause) Fine, thanks.

Malcolm Yeah? I’ve been thinking. I know everyone’s . . . I know the rumour mill is in full swing, if that’s not . . . mixing metaphors. But anyway, you know what I mean. About Mumbai. So I just thought I should say . . . well, I want to send you.

Barney (pause) Oh.

Malcolm I’m giving you Mumbai, basically, Barney.

Barney . . . Right. (Beat.) But I don’t want it.

Malcolm You don’t wa –? Hmm. What?

Barney I don’t want it. Malcolm. I’ve never wanted it.

Malcolm (pause) Oh.

Barney I. I didn’t think you’d be . . . I didn’t think you’d want to split me and . . . up. You always . . . everyone’s always . . . you know. ‘Dream team’. Huh. Why, why / would you –?

Malcolm No, I just thought . . . I thought you would want the . . . But I was wrong. Clearly.

Barney I just think there are other people. Other more . . . you know, great people, Jenny, Josie, I –

Malcolm OK. Yeah.

Barney I just . . . I don’t want to go there. Malcolm. I’m sorry.

Malcolm No, that’s . . . Oh, OK. No, that’s fine. But you know, fine then, but you know the way things are here at the moment . . . well, everyone needs to be doing something. Essentially. All right? There needs to be enough work to justify the staff, so . . . Yeah, this vodka account. That’s something we all need, Barney. Then. In that case. OK?

Barney (beat, nods) OK.





Scene Three


Office. Still black, white and grey.

Barney and Nicola are just dumping their things down on to their desks.

Nicola Nice one, Barney-boy. / Get in. Whoop whoop!

Barney No, you led it, well done you. Malcolm looked pleased.

Nicola (as Barry) He looked chuffed, he did. Proper happy, know what I mean?

Barney (as Keith) Yeah, smashing, mate, that was. On the money, no messing, take that to the bank.

Nicola (as Barry) So, fancy a jar? Little tipple, eh? Wet the whistle? Just aksing, mate. Just aksing. A cheeky few before home time? Bit of the old cough medicine before bed, you get me? One down the hatch, no harm done? Doctor’s orders. Just to get us going? Just to wind us down. After a day in the rat race. A day on the job? Fancy that? Bit of that do yer? (Singing, à la Franz Ferdinand.) ‘Yeah, do yer? Do yer, do yer wanna?’

Barney Yeah, all right.

Nicola Eh?

Barney Sounds nice.

Nicola Oh, no, sorry I didn’t mean it. Out with Scott tonight.

Barney Oh.

Nicola Sorry.

Barney No, that’s all right.

Nicola Come for a bit if you like. It’s his friend’s birthday or something.

Barney I’m all right, ta.

Nicola They’ll take the piss a bit of course, call you gay ’cause you don’t like football, but –

Barney I like football.

Nicola Oh, OK, Barney, you like football.

Barney spins a bit on his chair, clicking his mouse as Nicola packs away.

Nicola What will you do then?

Barney Dunno, just . . . go home and . . . you know. Just. Time of year, innit. Depressing.

Nicola I like it. Cosy.

Barney Leave work, already dark. Cold. Get home. Lights on. Bed early. Fucking hell.

Nicola What colour’s January, then?

Barney . . . I . . . (Shrugs.) Dunno, don’t really . . .

Nicola Sorry, I shouldn’t have . . . know you don’t . . .

Barney (pause) Like . . . Ford Cortina red. And it tastes like a, um . . . like a raspberry ice lolly. But with all the flavour sucked out, so almost just ice and it’s cold and wet on my tongue and . . . and it’s at the top, there, and you move down to February and then March, and . . . and it sounds a bit like . . . (Sighs a heavy, ‘can’t be bothered’ sigh.)

Nicola (laughs) Sounds as well now. God. So, like, August could be, um . . . (Screams like an excited child.)

Barney Yeah. And, I dunno why, but May feels a little bit camp.

Nicola (laughs) Yes! Ha ha . . . I wish I could . . . I mean the colour thing, I think I . . . but the patterns and that, it . . . I wish I understood it all a bit . . .

Barney Well it . . . you – It . . . (Pause. Sighs.) It’s like when you picture the days of the week. When you visualise ‘the week’, what pattern is it?

Nicola I don’t . . . that’s the thing, I / don’t really –

Barney Like, mine’s diagonally up from left to right, Monday to Sunday, getting steeper at the end. And you have to drop down off it to get back to Monday.

Nicola (thinks) Erm, dunno, maybe . . . maybe like in a circle. Monday, Tuesday, We – . . . And just keep going round and round. Or something.

Barney Well, there you go, see, that’s . . . And any colours?

Nicola No. We-ell. Sunday feels brown.

Barney My Sunday’s brown! It’s . . . there, that’s how . . . that’s it. Except that you actually . . . feel. . . (Trails.)

Nicola Wish I had something like that.

Barney (shakes his head) You . . . It . . .

Nicola Right. (Beginning to pack up to leave.) Well, we did good, I thought, Barn.

Barney Yeah. Playing off each. Worked.

Nicola It did work. We work.

Barney We do, we . . .

Nicola Well. Thank you for your benediction. (Smiles, and winks.)

Barney That today’s?

Nicola (indicating a ‘word-a-day’ calendar) Yup.

Barney Very good.

Nicola So I was thinking . . . hmm. I was thinking . . . maybe I could take the reins on this one? On the vodka. If that was . . . something you thought was . . . OK. (As Timothy.) You know, have a pop at it, Charles. Good crack, all that, yah?

Barney Uh. Yeah. If . . . if that’s . . .

Nicola I don’t mind, though. If you . . . it’s just a lot of other people, Jenny, Josie, you especially . . . I just feel I need to puff up my portfolio. A bit. Whereas yours is so –

Barney No, it . . . I mean, yeah. Yes. Of . . . (As Charles.) Yah, you go for it, Tim. Let’s nail this fucker. With you all the way.

Nicola (as Timothy) Great. Thanks.

Barney Welcome.

Nicola And you’ll be there for me, will you? You and your . . . well, you know, our little secret weapon. I can rely on it, can I, yeah?

Barney . . . Of course. Always.

Nicola Hmm. You’re so cute, Barney.

Barney Am I?

Nicola How can you not have found anyone?

Barney (shrugs; beat) Maybe I have.

Nicola Maybe you have?

Barney Maybe I just don’t know it yet.

Nicola Yeah, maybe.

Barney Maybe it’s them that hasn’t found me. I don’t know.

Nicola Don’t know what?

Barney I don’t know what.

Nicola You don’t know what you don’t know?

Barney No.

Nicola Be in late tomorrow morning. Opticians.

Barney How is it, any better?

Nicola (rubbing) Sometimes. God, hope they don’t give me glasses. Look like a –

An office phone rings on Barney’s desk.

Barney (answering) Hello? Oh. Hi, Scott. It’s Barney. You downstairs?

Nicola Put it on speaker.

Barney Hold on. (Does.)

Nicola On my way down, wait there!

Scott (voice, off) All right, see you in a sec.

Nicola Catch you tomorrow, Barn. (Blows him a kiss and exits.)

Barney (pause) You, uh . . . everything all right?

Scott (voice, off) What’s that, mate?

Barney With the wedding and everything, all going OK?

Scott (voice, off) Uh, yeah. Think so. Dunno, be honest with you, mate. Just . . .

Barney Huh. No.

Scott (voice, off) Let ’em get on with it. You know.

Barney Yeah, best way, innit.

Pause.

Scott’s (voice, off) You good? Everything, uh . . . ?

Barney Yeah, yeah. You know. Busy. (Pause.) Erm, so I’m gonna get / back to –

Scott (voice, off to Nicola) Hi, you all right?

Nicola (slightly off) Give me that. (Closer, off.) See ya, Barn! Have a good night!

Barney Yeah. Bye.

The line goes dead. Barney sits looking at Nicola’s desk.





Scene Four


Meeting room. The Whisky Taster stands waiting. He wears a tartan kilt. His large suitcase sits on the table. Barney enters.

Barney Hello. Sorry to, to keep you, um . . .

Whisky Taster Hello?

Barney glares at the kilt, and has to steady himself.

Barney Uh, waiting. I – you . . . I think you’ve been dealing with, uh, Nicola? My colleague. She, she’ll be . . . right along. Do you need anything? I could . . . um . . .

Whisky Taster Are you all right?

Nicola enters and power-walks over, hand extended, holding the vodka with the other.

Nicola Hello, sir. Nice to meet you. I’m Nicola. We spoke on the phone.

Whisky Taster No.

Nicola Sorry?

Whisky Taster I haven’t spoken to anyone on the phone, no.

Nicola Ah, right, sorry, I thought I spoke to . . . think, think, think, Martin? Or someone? From the distillery? (Referencing his kilt.) Oh, look at that. That’s beautiful. Do you actually wear that around?

Whisky Taster looks down at his kilt then back at Nicola.

Nicola How was your train down – long?

Whisky Taster Um. Fine.

Nicola Still, First Class, eh. Bit more comfortable. Least we could do –

Whisky Taster / First Class?

Nicola – for such a long journey. Yes, your seat in First Class. Our pleasure.

Whisky Taster Ah. (Pause.) I don’t know what that means.

Nicola On the . . . doesn’t matter. Just the seat we gave you.

Whisky Taster That you gave me?

Nicola Yes. You sat in First Class, didn’t you?

Whisky Taster Ah. I just got on and sat down.

Nicola In First Class.

Whisky Taster I don’t know.

Nicola No, that’s OK. That’s – it’s just, that’s fine. On your way back though, look at your ticket. It gives you a seat number, and . . . it’s more expensive. But that’s the least we can do. Given you’ve come down. You’re staying with someone, is that right?

Whisky Taster . . . Hmm?

Nicola You know people down here.

Whisky Taster . . .

Nicola I just mean where are you staying in London? Where have you come from now?

Whisky Taster Fort William.

Nicola Right, but I mean here, when you got off the train, you went . . . ?

Whisky Taster I came straight from the station. It took . . . I wasn’t sure of the way.

Barney But you have somewhere to stay, is what Nicola is just checking.

Nicola A relative. I was told.

Whisky Taster (pause) Ye-es.

Nicola And whereabouts is that?

Whisky Taster I . . . haven’t been able to get in touch. Yet.

Nicola (looks at Barney) Well . . . why don’t we, uh . . . why don’t we put you up in a hotel tonight? We’d planned to do that anyway. Just so you don’t have to worry, how’s that?

Whisky Taster Uh, thank you.

Nicola You’re very welcome, thank you. And feel free to use anything, just keep the receipts, we’ll take care of it. Mini bar. Movies on demand, WiFi, anything like that.

Whisky Taster OK.

Nicola Can I get you anything now? Tea? Coffee? Or something stronger? Maybe not just yet, eh? Lot of tasting to do. And it is four o’clock on a Tuesday. Don’t want to be hammered by five. By six, hell yeah, but not five.

Nicola laughs. Silence. Whisky Taster looks confused. Barney is taking deep breaths, wiping his forehead. Nicola puts the vodka and three glasses on the table.

Nicola Right. Well. Here we are. What I was talking to you about. Or whoever. What we wanted you to peruse. Give us some of your pearls. Your language. Your . . . poetry.

Whisky Taster Huh?

Nicola The vodka?

Whisky Taster Vodka?

Nicola Yes. (Tapping it.) Here.

Whisky Taster Vodka is not what I do, young lady; I do whisky.

Nicola Yes. Exactly. That’s exactly my point. That’s what we want. We want this vodka to be like whisky. We’re changing it, you see. Vodka. We’re changing it. So. Yeah. (Pause.) I’m sorry, what’s your job title again? At the distillery?

Whisky Taster Which distillery?

Nicola Uh. I don’t – your distillery. The one you work for.

Whisky Taster I don’t work for a distillery.

Nicola Oh. Sorry, I . . . we were – Your people, they told us about you.

Whisky Taster My people?

Nicola Yes, they said . . . they told me you were the best.

Whisky Taster I . . . It’s – it can be difficult to describe what I do. There are no set people I work for. You know.

Nicola Right. I see. OK. Well, shall we sit down and have a drink of this? Hmm?

Whisky Taster (noticing Barney growing increasingly unsteady) Is he all right?

Nicola Barney?

Barney Y-yes, yeah, I’m –

Nicola Sorry, you’ll have to get used to these creative London types. I’m sure you’ve never seen the like. Actually, sorry, I didn’t catch your name.

Barney I’m sorry, I’m, I’m, I’m really . . . would you – would it be possible for you to, to . . . take that off. Or –

Whisky Taster Huh?

Nicola Barney?

Barney The – your kilt. Sorry, I’m . . . I’m really . . . No, forget it.

Whisky Taster Take it off?

Nicola He’s joking. Barney, stop messing around. (Laughs.)

Whisky Taster Is he all right?

Nicola It’s fine. Barney feels things more than most people.

Whisky Taster Huh?

Barney Nick.

Nicola He has a weird thing with colours.

Whisky Taster With colours?

Nicola He feels them?

Whisky Taster He . . .

Barney It doesn’t matter. Just –

Nicola Synas . . . ?

Whisky Taster . . . Feels them?

Barney Honestly, it, it, it, it –

Nicola Synanasthe . . . ? I can never – but that’ll be why, you see. (Pointing to the kilt.) All of them. Sends him a bit loopy. Although at least they’re straight lines. Doesn’t like squiggles; says circles ‘sound’ funny. Ignore him, he normally calms down after a bit.

Whisky Taster I’ll take it off if it’s giving you migraines, sonny.

Nicola No, don’t worry.

Whisky Taster But I must warn you I do wear it in the fashion for which it was traditionally intended, if you get my drift.

Nicola No, this is silly. Barney, stop being a knob.

Barney I’m not being a knob.

Nicola (laughs politely to the Whisky Taster) I am so sorry. Look, basically what we’re trying to do is reinvigorate the culture of drinking vodka, starting with the way it’s branded. Do you drink vodka?

Whisky Taster No.

Nicola And there you are, see? We want people like you to drink vodka. Drink vodka the way you would drink whisky. OK? So what makes you not drink vodka? See, I think it’s because, to a man such as yourself, a cultured man, the culture of drinking vodka is not something that appeals. We’re not some freezing eastern bloc shit-hole, it isn’t ingrained in our national, uh, consciousness that it’s a cheap fuel alternative. The only thing ingrained in our consciousness about vodka is the branding. And so we’re going to change that. For example, I know. Let’s play a game. (Gesturing a seat.) Please.

Whisky Taster sits.

Nicola (sits) Let’s play some word-association. What other words come into our head when I say the word ‘Russia?’ Hmm? Anything, however obvious or stereotypical. If we go round, and just the first thing that we think of. I’ll start. Uh. Ballet. Barney?

Barney Um. Red.

Nicola offers vodka over to the Whisky Taster.

Whisky Taster . . .

Nicola Snow. For example. Barney?

Barney Cold War.

Nicola Wolves.

Barney Submarines.

Whisky Taster Erm . . .

Nicola First thing that comes into you head. Missiles.

Whisky Taster Dostoevsky.

Barney / Nicola Great.

Whisky Taster Stalin.

Nicola Good one. Uh, red and green army uniforms.

Barney A sort of . . . clunky, metallic sound . . .

Whisky Taster . . .

Nicola Dolls that slot –

Whisky Taster Chekhov –

Nicola – inside each other – yes, very good.

Barney Your breath in the air . . .

Nicola Ice skating.

Whisky Taster Chess.

Barney Clapping your, your gloves together to keep warm by a, a –

Nicola Pulling an envelope out / of your jacket in secret . . .

Barney – by a burning barrel.

Nicola You see it’s these things that all vodkas brand themselves on in this country. Old Russia. Old women with, with, with headscarves. Any more?

Barney Rachmaninov. Stravinsky. Tchaikovsky.

Nicola Good. Any more?

Whisky Taster thinks. Shifts in his seat, looks very uncomfortable.

Nicola You’re very tired. I’m so sorry, you’ve come all this way, and you haven’t even managed to dump your things yet. Why don’t we get that hotel sorted for you, yeah? Then maybe start proper tomorrow morning or something? Sound like a plan? OK?

Whisky Taster . . . OK.





Scene Five


The roof. Nicola and Barney. Nicola is smoking. Barney hands her a mug of coffee, keeping one for himself.

Nicola Jesus H. Sorry, Barn. Weirdo or what? Shit. Shit! Halfway through the week and we’ve got fuck all.

Barney You never know, he could still be useful.

Nicola Hmm. Well, if he ain’t, I’ll send him home. Can’t have him just leaking money in a fucking hotel, Malcolm’ll go nuts. (Takes a sip of her drink. Squirms.) Yuk. The fuck? This one of your instant shits?

Barney Don’t start. Can’t stand the posh stuff; too strong.

Nicola Christ, need to grow a pair, Barn.

Barney ‘Grow a . . . ’ What are you, some eighties, ball-breaking, shoulder-padded fucking –

Nicola Just saying.

Barney What? Saying what?

Nicola All right, calm down, drink your piss.

Barney Can’t stand ‘just saying’. No, you are saying. You are saying something. ‘I’m going to stab you. What, I’m just saying’.

Nicola All right, Barney, I get your point –

Barney ‘We will fight them on the streets and on the beaches; what, I’m just saying.’

Nicola All right!

Barney sips his coffee. Beat. Smiles at her.

Barney Oy. You’ll like this one.

Nicola What?

Barney ‘I wish to wash my Irish wristwatch’. Go.

Nicola (attempting the tongue-twister) I wish to wash my Irish wist – my Irish wristwash. Watch. I wish to watch my iwish wish wash – fuck!

Barney laughs

Nicola Good one, that. (Smokes.) So, how’s it going, ‘blue, silver, and gold’, any thoughts, new ideas? Anything I can feed through to Creative, get them off my back.

Barney Yeah, some, just thinking of, uh . . . you know, types of music. Images. Got some copy suggestions. It’s coming.

Nicola Like what, what music?

Barney It sounds . . . they sound like a piano. I think. At the moment. Quite soft and sad.

Nicola Fucking hell, Barn, we don’t want to depress them into drinking vodka.

Barney I’m on it, don’t worry.

Nicola (beat) I wonder if it’s . . . I dunno, I don’t wanna push you or nothing. But. I don’t know. You say you try not to think about it but it seems that, like, if only you . . . kind of . . . did. Start thinking about it. Started seeing. Everything. And hearing and tasting everything, a bit more. Then you’d find it easier. Maybe.

Barney It . . . it doesn’t work like that.

Nicola OK. OK. It’s just – I’m sorry. It’s just Malcolm was laying it on thick. You know. About how important this one is. And whether we can . . . ‘up our game’. Type thing. That’s all.

Barney (beat) I’d like to. I would. I’m just . . . you can’t, erm . . . ‘control’. What they’ll make you feel. And there are things that I . . . that I’m not sure I want to. Feel.

Beat. Nicola nods. Smokes.

Barney So anyway, come on, then, let’s see ’em.

Nicola No. Fuck off.

Barney What. Bet you look cool. Intellectual and savvy and –

Nicola See, you’re already taking the piss, no.

Barney I won’t. Promise.

Nicola sighs. Takes out a pair of glasses from her pocket and puts them on.

Barney Aw. They look good.

Nicola Don’t lie.

Barney Seriously. I think you look . . . dunno.

Nicola Like –

Barney Pretty. (Small pause.) Well, you know . . . for . . .

Nicola Mm. Well. I wanna get contacts instead. Not having fucking speckie-four-eyes on all me wedding photos, Jesus.

Barney (laughing) ‘Speckie-four-eyes’.

Nicola (laughs) I mean it. Trying to get flowers sorted for the church.

Barney Oh yeah.

Nicola Dad’s going all out.

Barney OK.

Nicola Do you, uh . . . no. ’S alright.

Barney What?

Nicola Na-ah.

Barney Go on.

Nicola Nah, it’s silly.

Barney Fuck’s sake.

Nicola Well. Erm. I wondered if you, like . . . I dunno. With your ‘thing’. If you had, like . . . I dunno. A colour for . . . you know. For feeling . . . you know –

Barney What?

Nicola For. Love. A colour for love.

Barney . . .

Nicola Or . . .

Barney Not . . . erm –

Nicola Just struggling to pick flowers, you know. Thought it might be funny. Get your take on it, type thing. Carnations. Lilies. Orchids. You know. Sorry. I know you don’t like . . . talking about – or . . . sorry, Barn, I –

Barney No, no, no, it’s . . . not – I don’t, um / . . . I don’t, like –

Nicola Seriously. Enough. Honestly. I’m sorry. (She smokes) Does make me feel cleverer, though. Having these on.

Barney You don’t need them to be clever, Nick. You’re very clever.

Nicola Most people don’t think so.

Barney They’re knobheads.

Nicola Scott never thinks of me as being par-tic-u-larly clever. Not in . . . you know, not in that way. Anyway.

Barney Well . . .

Nicola (beat; smokes) Come round dead quick, hasn’t it? Mumbai. When it first got mentioned I remember thinking, ‘fuck, that’s ages away’. But . . . Christ, getting wound up about the whole thing, now, need to calm down.

Barney Why you getting wound up?

Nicola Why do you think?

Barney There’s / no point.

Nicola Why is anyone? Because I want it. What do you mean, no point?

Barney If it’s meant to be, it’s meant to be.

Beat. Nicola smokes. Watches him.

Nicola That’s what people say to people when they don’t think something is going to happen. You don’t reckon I’ll get it.

Barney I reckon there –

Nicola (laughs, a little passive-aggressively) Right. Well . . . maybe you . . . well –

Barney I’m just saying, there are so many people up for it, people who’ve / been here longer, who are slightly more –

Nicola Well, you know, it’s all right for you, Barney, you’re safe aren’t you, they ‘need’ you, never gonna let you go, / but some –

Barney Oh. Whatever.

Nicola – of us, some of us aren’t as indispensi-what’s-it as you, some of us have got to try and make ourselves as . . . I mean, seriously, look at me. I’ve only ever been in this one company, working my way up. If I’m not here then I won’t be bloody anywhere.

Barney Shut up. You’re brilliant. They won’t let you go, Mumbai or no Mumbai.

Nicola Well . . . Be strange, wouldn’t it? If they did split us up.

Barney (pause) Hmm . . .

Nicola Would you miss me? In the ridiculously unlikely event that I went; Mumbai.

Barney (slight disbelief at the question) Would I . . . ? (It catches in his throat.)

Nicola (playfully) Would you? Would you, Barn? Having to find someone else? Would you miss me?

Barney tries to smile, but can’t. Shuffles his feet. Looks at her. Looks around. Looks at his feet. Looks at her. Nicola notices his reaction. She smokes. Silence.

Nicola Can’t wait for the weekend, now.

Barney Yeah.

Nicola I’m gonna get off my tits. I reckon. Off My Fucking Tits.





Scene Six


Meeting room. Malcolm is clearing some of his things from the table, having just finished a meeting. Barney standing, waiting to start his.

Malcolm Things all right, Barney? Happy and well?

Barney Yes. Thank you.

Malcolm Never really got a chance to ask, how was Christmas and all that? Good?

Barney Yeah, thanks. It was fine.

Malcolm Good. (Pause. As though expecting more. . .) What, just head back up to Macclesfield, did you? Do the / family thing?

Barney Mansfield.

Malcolm Mansfield, right.

Barney Yeah.

Malcolm waits. An almost visible eye-roll – it’s always this difficult with Barney.

Malcolm OK. Well – ooh. (Turning back.) Er. Where’d you get, on the whole . . . the demographic thing?

Barney The what thing, sorry?

Malcolm Vodka. Young people. Widening the net.

Barney Erm. Oh, erm . . .

Malcolm Sorry, I thought I asked you to . . . start thinking about that.

Barney Sorry, I thought . . . I thought we all did think about that and decided that we . . .

Malcolm (comes further in, puts his files down) Well, no, I mean it’s not a problem if you decide to go the other way, it’s just, all I want you to do is / really think –

Barney It’s not so much . . . is it the ‘other way’?

Malcolm I’m just saying, I know Chris, and I think / that’s something . . .

Barney I mean really it’s ‘the way’ that we pitched him. So / it’s not ‘other’.

Malcolm (still trying to be friendly, and casual) Barney, please don’t . . . interrupt. When I’m . . .

Barney . . .

Malcolm It’s ju – . . . you can – both of you, actually, it’s like a rollercoaster sometimes, that . . . I don’t even think that’s what I mean. A steamroller. When you get going.

Barney . . .

Malcolm You can speak, Barney; it’s interrupting when you talk over someone, not when someone has stopped talking and / is waiting for you to –

Barney Malcolm, I’m sorry, / I wasn’t –

Malcolm That’s interrupting, what you did just then.

OK? That’s interrupting. (Beat. Softens. . .) Now it’s turned into this . . . like a, huh, like a serious . . . and it’s not. (Laughs.) Sorry, Barn. It’s just . . . you know? Especially with all th – Just kind of think we need to listen to each other. At the moment. A bit more. Sorry.

What were we even talking about?

Barney Vodka demographic.

Malcolm Right. Exactly. So, yes, of course, go off and do your own thing, completely. I really just meant I want to plant these . . . things, in there, see if they . . . (Beat.) I know everyone laughs when I use these . . . the ‘wanky definitions’, you more than anyone, probably, but . . . OK, but for the sake of argument, say there’s me, my lot. (References himself.) Generation X. Yes? And you. Generation Y. OK? So. ‘Gen Y’, that’s all I’m asking you to really think about. Given that They Are You. And You Are Them. And Nicola, in particular, without being . . .

Barney . . . what?

Malcolm Well, you know. (Laughs.) Oh, come on, Barney. I mean, people a bit like Nicola; girls, that age, and boys. It seems they’d be the easier . . . isn’t it, at the moment? Easier, more appropriate, to be thinking about them. So just that stuff, all the stuff you talked about, with Facebook, and Twitter, I see that. I think that’s more like it, that’s the right tracks. Huh, not that I’ve ever understood it myself. Do you . . . (Mimes typing.) Are you into all that, or –

Barney Erm, no, not really.

Malcolm Boggles my mind. Honestly. Never have people spoken to each other so often, and yet all it’s exposed is an absolute absence of anything worthwhile to say. (Beat.) So seems like Nicola’s doing well, anyway, on this one? The idea, about this . . . the fella. Great. I really like Nicola. And I know you do, too. And that you’d do anything to help her. I know that you’ll, uh . . . ‘give her’ . . . what she needs, in terms of . . . in terms of you, Barney. I think that would be fair. If she needs you to.

And, hey, I was only being told yesterday by some of the Execs how ‘vital’ you are. Barney. How ‘key’. So . . .

Barney . . . OK.

Malcolm (smiles) OK.

Malcolm exits. Barney is left alone for a few seconds.

Nicola and the Whisky Taster enter, their first lines heard on the approach.

Nicola How was it? Your hotel?

Whisky Taster It was. Fine. Thank you.

Nicola Sleep well?

Whisky Taster No.

Nicola Go anywhere nice last night?

Whisky Taster No. I stayed in my room. Watched some television.

Nicola Cool.

Whisky Taster Musical channels. American. Mainly.

Nicola Yeah?

Whisky Taster Is it what young . . . is that what you’re watching?

Nicola Who?

Whisky Taster You? Young people?

Nicola Dunno. Maybe. I like your jacket, top, thing. Very dapper. Going anywhere nice?

Whisky Taster looks down at his jacket, pulling at it a bit.

Whisky Taster Uh. My daughter, I was . . .

Nicola Cool, man. Well. (Nudges the bottle and glass forward.) Here we are then.

Whisky Taster looks at the vodka bottle, and at Nicola.

Nicola You probably think we’re cheating a bit, don’t you? Just wanting to short cut it all those years, decades, centuries of your . . . of the culture of whisky evolving to become this, this –

Barney But actually, no, what we’re trying / to do, is, is . . .

Nicola Exactly, no, we’re are trying build it up little by little, softly, softly, that’s why we don’t want a massive, bling bling campaign, full of fireworks, we want it to develop, or seem to develop, organically. Even though it’s not, even though we’re ‘managing’ it. But I know what you’re thinking, ‘Well, that’s still cynical marketing,’ that’s still . . . ‘Grrr, the evils of advertising, brainwashing,’ but it’s not, any more, is it, Barn? It’s all changed now.

Barney Because we get it.

Nicola That’s it. As consumers, we all get it. We’re all so sophisticated, now, we know how advertising works, what they’re trying to do. And you know, Jesus, they’re not forcing us, we fucking love buying stuff. It’s like we’re all in on the joke.

Barney Everyone has a favourite advert.

Nicola God, if I hear one more person talk about the new Honda ad I’ll eat my own arm. Or that iPhone one. People love teaser ads. They love film trailers. People get excited by good campaigns. They Will Get Excited By This. And to get us started . . . (Nudging the bottle.) We just want to know what you think. (Waits.) We really are very grateful for your time, you know.

Whisky Taster You’re not having my time.

Nicola We’re . . . ?

Whisky Taster You’re sharing it with me. But it is still mine.

He sighs a deep breath, like a maestro about to begin conducting.

Whisky Taster So you want to shave off one final layer? See if there’s any use left. Well, let’s get one thing straight, shall we . . .

He opens up his case and starts unpacking his kit, talking as he goes. A small glass jug, into which he pours from a bottle of spring water. Three green tinted bottles of whisky, lined in a row. Three whisky glasses. He opens one of the whisky bottles and pours a dram into each of the three glasses.

Whisky Taster Physicists and scientists do not discover anything that is not already there. That was not already created by God, you understand? Newton did not invent gravity, Einstein did not create energy, Hawking did not invent time. MacDiarmid, quote, ‘It is a monstrous thing, that earth can be, no more to me than what my thoughts decree’. I Am Not God. Words can never convey any whole truth. But you’re right. I am the best. And I am willing to share things with you, you can filter out what you need, condense it, and bottle it, or whatever, but you will respect what it is I have or I won’t give you anything. My gift? I can smell. . . a well-made, loved and cared for single malt whisky and tell you the proximity its distillery lies from the sea! I can taste its age! I can tell you in what season it was distilled. And it should, of course, be distilled in winter. (Pointing to Barney.) Why?

Barney What?

Whisky Taster Winter? Why?

Barney Uh. What? Winter, what –?

Whisky Taster Summer. For the whisky. Is an overbearing mother. Her children are fat, and lazy, and spoilt. Winter? She pushes her children. Hardens them, challenges them, but most importantly, punishes them. Unashamed, unforgiving, merciless, but she is honest, and she is fair. Siphons out the weak and rewards the strong. She is Darwinism. She is Nietzsche. Evolution is ruthless. Our distinctly ‘human’ notions of universal welfare, and equality, contradict the natural order. And nature will not support us, ever, in our quest for fairness and compassion. She’ll test every rivet, eye up every bolt, exploit every weak link, striving constantly to show us the fallibility of our idea and bring it down.

He smells his whisky, and savours it. He looks at Nicola.

Whisky Taster Do you have any idea what it has to go through to get here?

The barley is drowned, and then burnt, crushed and mashed, dried, and fermented. The gruel left over is drained into copper stills, to be boiled and burned, then distilled, once then twice. It’s like . . . sex. Not love-making. Sex. Beautiful, yet violent. Pleasurable, but a struggle. Messy. Exhausting. Dangerous, even? Pushing, pulling, slamming, turning, twisting, hard, strong, but careful, precise, extracting the tiny little fleeting thing you need . . . and discarding the rest. And then, then, when you think it’s all over, the spirit is sealed, tight, in a barrel, a cask, and wheeled, into a warehouse, surrounded by mountains, and forests, and the doors are sealed, and shut, and tight, where it is to sit, silently, in the dark, and think, and mature, for years and years and years.

Nicola Our vodka is triple-distilled.

Whisky Taster . . .

Nicola Not just once or twice. Three times. That something we can use?

Whisky Taster Distillation is, by definition, reducing and removing. To make the same. It is the uniform for school children. It is the state restricting the man. Distil too much, wee girlie, and you’ll end up with a bland, characterless fool. No, it is from our flaws that we truly get our taste. Our flavour. I would imagine that to be perfect were to be very bland indeed.

He slides them each a glass along the table, and one for himself.

We start with Glenfiddich. A Highland whisky. Less peaty than some. More flavoursome, perhaps, than others. He is light. And approachable. A welcome in.

Nicola Mm. (Making to sip.)

Whisky Taster NOT! Yet . . . (Pause. Holds up his glass.) Take it straight first. No ice. Never ice. Though a drop of spring water after the first sip helps to release the flavours, reduce their inhibitions, so they may burst forth and dance. Now, smell.

Barney and Nicola smell. Nicola scowls, and Barney rubs his head, looking increasingly pained. The Whisky Taster closes his eyes, and speaks softly.

Whisky Taster Smell for the wood of the cask . . . smell for the smoke from the fires . . . smell for the copper of the stills . . . the dust on the warehouse floor . . . the spray from the sea . . . for the years it spent in the dark. For the things it missed, the people born and people died, for the stories told, the wars fought, the hearts broken . . . Now. Taste.

They take a sip. Nicola grimaces crudely, but the Whisky Taster pays no attention.

Whisky Taster (to Barney) What did you taste?

Nicola (coughing) Bloody strong. Jesus.

Whisky Taster What did you taste?

Barney A cat asleep in a bookshop . . . spring sunshine on white rocks . . . erm . . . molten iron crawling across a steel floor . . . chemistry lesson at school . . . little nuggets of gold . . .

Whisky Taster (softly) That’s how you taste whisky?

Barney (quieter) That’s how I . . . taste. Everything.

Whisky Taster (quieter still) Well I’ll be . . . (Back with the whisky.) Twenty-one years old. Gran Reserve. Rum cask. There is a . . . (Sniffs.) a floral fragrance. Heather. Slight smoke. But delicate. Not from a fire. Not even a match blown out. Just a match lit, perhaps. The scent of the friction as it strikes. It feels. . . soft. It . . . sounds like . . . Beethoven.

Nicola Wow. Barney, how cool is this? This is great.

Whisky Taster (to Barney) What’s your name?

Barney Uh. Barney.

Whisky Taster Ach! Your real name. Family name.

Barney Munroe.

Whisky Taster Scottish?

Barney No. Well, I . . . um –

Whisky Taster M. U. N. R. O.

Barney (pause) ‘E’.

Whisky Taster (didn’t hear) Uh? / ‘E’?

Barney ‘E’. On the end. Yeah.

Whisky Taster ‘Dread God’. Clan motto. ‘Dread God’. Not know that?

Barney No.

Whisky Taster Red, yellow and blue.

Barney (suddenly looking horrified) W-what?

Whisky Taster Your tartan.

Barney My –?

Whisky Taster Red. Yellow. And blue. Against the red, it’s almost purple –

Barney (holding his head, whispering) Stop . . .

Whisky Taster (pause) Where you from?

Nicola (with the vodka) Shall we crack this open?

Whisky Taster Your accent?

Barney Uh, yes, northern. Em. Mansfield.

Whisky Taster You are not Northern. I am Northern.

Nicola I’m from Croydon. Ever been? Don’t, actually, it’s rubbish.

Whisky Taster (to Nicola) What’s your name?

Nicola Kennedy. Oh, do I have one? Motto.

Whisky Taster (thinks) Avise la fin. ‘Consider the end’.

Nicola What? What does that mean? The end of what?

Whisky Taster Munroe and Kennedy? Like Marilyn and Jack. (Pause.) What did your father do?

Nicola What did my father do?

Whisky Taster His job, what was he? His craft, his trade?

Nicola Flowers. He sold flowers on a stall. Could sell anything actually, my dad. Coals to Newcastle. (Laughs.) As he used to say. Which I never really got. Why coals to Newcastle? Dunno. Anyway, I take after my mum more, if anything, even though it was my dad who was always there. Always remember the sound of her coming home late from work, her heels across the hall floor downstairs. Used to think she sounded so powerful. Clop, clop. Clop, clop . . .

Whisky Taster Your family is your cask, it’s where you grew and . . . became. Different distilleries choose different types of oak cask to seal the whisky in for eight years, twelve years, twenty-one. Some used to hold bourbon, others sherry, flavours that seeped into the wood. So while the whisky is growing up, and maturing inside, those old tastes and smells from the cask seep back, into the whisky, forming its character. And flavour. We all taste and reek of the cask that reared us. It runs through our blood. Lives in our skin, for ever. (Pause. To Barney.) What did your father do?

Barney Um. PE teacher.

Whisky Taster Strong? (Pause.) You look like him?

Barney Uh, I never thought so, but –

Whisky Taster You must. Act like him? The soil, its nutrients, its vitamins, its diseases, affect the trees that grow in it. Thus the wood of that tree affects the cask it becomes, and so affects all generations that mature inside it. Shared characters. Shared flaws. In our fibres. Our fabric.

Nicola See, all that. Wood and soil, that’s . . . It’s what we’re looking for.

She has poured some still water into the Whisky Taster’s glass. She swills it around and empties it into the plant, returning and pouring him vodka from her bottle.

Whisky Taster ‘That’s what you’re looking for’.

Nicola Yes. It is. So, fancy a little taste of ours now?

Whisky Taster takes the glasses over to the pot plant and pours the vodka in. He returns and pours whisky from another bottle into the glasses.

Nicola Oh. OK. Erm –

Whisky Taster Macallan. Matured only in Spanish sherry casks. / It is dark, and heavy.

Nicola I’m sorry, but I would actually like you to / taste this, please?

Whisky Taster (holds his hand out) Give me your hand.

Barney What?

Nicola Don’t, Barney, we have to get on.

Whisky Taster Give me. Your hand.

Beat. Barney tentatively gives Whisky Taster his hand. Whisky Taster places the palm tight over his glass, and tips it and the glass upside down quite quickly, and then back again, so that no whisky escapes. Whisky Taster gives Barney his hand back.

Whisky Taster Rub. Smell.

Barney smells his hand. It visibly affects him.

Nicola Barney?

Whisky Taster It’s all right.

Nicola You’re hurting him!

Whisky Taster Well?

Barney Popcorn . . . on a Friday night. Fireworks . . . when it’s cold. And you can see your breath. But you don’t mind that you’re cold. Because you’re happy . . .

Beat. Whisky Taster smells his glass.

Whisky Taster Burnt caramels, honey, raisins. It sounds more like . . . Gershwin. This one. Wild, yet graceful. It is . . . a movie star. Of the old days. Ages better than anyone else. And versatile. Can play all the parts under the sun. The older expressions are more refined, less wild, less loud, more at ease with who they are. But still . . . dazzling . . .

Barney and Whisky Taster drink. Nicola sniffs it and plonks it on the table. Silence, as Barney and Whisky Taster savour it. Staring at each other.

Nicola Great. That’s great. Shall we move on to vodka? Barney?

Whisky Taster (to Barney) You are . . . the first child? You have younger brothers?

Barney What?

Nicola (making to clear away) Or not. Whatever.

Barney Yes. One brother. Younger, yes.

Nicola I’ve got four. Older. Only girl in a house full of boys. Imagine. Fucking nightmare. I wonder if you wouldn’t mind taking a swig of this, please. Then we won’t keep you, I’m sure you got other people you need to go and, um . . . chat. To. So. Would you mind? At least give us a sniff, or something? / Anything?

Whisky Taster (ignoring her) A single malt is precious for one reason alone.

Nicola (slamming it down) OK. Well if you’re not going to try it then / I don’t see –

Whisky Taster It is not like the others. Most of what a distillery produces is mixed with what other distilleries produce to create blends. Our quest for perfection. Adding this, taking out that, make us look better, smell better, taste better, make people want us more. We are embarrassed, and ashamed, of our raw selves, and so we blend! We blend . . . so that we may blend in. So that we may taste like the others. Blander. Less unique, but able to fit in. Happy in our duplicity! Safety through mediocrity. But, but! A single malt is itself. The product of one cask alone. It smells of its imperfections, tastes of its flaws. Smacks of its sins. But proud. Laid bare on a slab. Warts and all. Here I am . . . Oh, in the days of youth, Of all torments the most terrible, Not . . . to be . . . like others . . . Never to live a single day Without being painfully reminded that one is not like others . . .

Barney What is that?

Nicola Barney, I don’t think we have time, unfortunately, if he isn’t / going to –

Whisky Taster MacDiarmid. The poet.

Nicola – help us then we need to start thinking of a Plan B. (Holding her hand out to Whisky Taster.) Thank you for coming, anyway.

Whisky Taster (opening up another bottle in haste) Wait, one more. I want / him to have just one –

Nicola No, I’m sorry, we have to get on / but thank you anyway –

Barney Nicola.

Nicola is snapping, a little.

Whisky Taster (pouring) Talisker. Produces some of the strongest expressions in the world. Its power, its power, is just magnificent. Raised with brutality on misty Skye.

Nicola After you’ve gathered your things, Barney will show you out.

Whisky Taster (looks at her) All those brothers. Must have been hard to get heard.

Nicola (smiling wryly) No point, mister, sorry. I’m not a riddle wrapped in a puzzle trapped in an / enigma like this one. You won’t find anything here.

Whisky Taster One bottle amongst many on the shelf, just sat waiting for some –

Nicola I’m not on the – Wanna know who’s on the shelf? Barney is. Yeah, your boy there, I’ve been picked up though, I’m afraid. So, sorry about that.

Whisky Taster (continuing, with his glass) The longer a whisky matures, the more flavoursome it becomes. The stronger its character. But it needs the strength that comes with age; otherwise . . . it’s so hard, so hard.

Nicola Beautiful. Have a safe journey back, Barney, see you in five.

Nicola leaves. Whisky Taster stands, holding the glass out. He lowers it slowly.

Barney If, um . . . if you’d like to give an invoice to Eve on the front desk, we’ll make sure you receive payment in the form of a cheque at the end of this month.

Whisky Taster Do you love her?

Barney (pause) Al – alternatively, if you’d care to post one plus expenses –

Whisky Taster She knows. You know . . .

Barney (pause) We’re also able to make a BACS transfer direct, though, um . . . Uh, be warned, once it shows on your account, it will still take between three and five working days to clear.

Whisky Taster What colour is she, I wonder.

Barney shakes his head, increasingly pained.

Barney No . . .

Whisky Taster (beat, awkwardly) I. Haven’t seen my, uh . . . daughter. In quite some . . . I’d like to . . . do that. Before I go . . .

Barney Well then . . . feel free to, uh . . . to stay. A bit. A while. If you’d like.

Whisky Taster (beat) You know, the thing about a gift . . . is that it’s something you are given. Not something you necessarily asked for or wanted. Right?

Barney (beat) A ‘gift’? Where’s the ‘gift’ –?

Whisky Taster Where they all are. Wrapped up, in a box.

Barney This is no ‘gift’, it . . . it . . .

He looks at the kilt, and then grabs hold of his head. Eyes closed.

It hurts. It hurts to feel these things when I do it. There’s too many of them, that’s why I try to keep it shut, there’s just too many of them . . .

Beat. Whisky Taster watches him.

Whisky Taster They say, as babies, we can smell our mother’s anger, taste her words. Like animals. But as the brain develops, the senses separate from one another. Or are supposed to. To make life . . . a little easier. Perhaps. But it’s still all an illusion. Our brains transfer everything into something else; the only thing that is truly real is silence, and darkness. (Beat.) Have you ever thought about just . . . untying the bow? And letting it go?

Barney I can’t . . . I can’t. To let them all out, once they’re all out, I / can’t put them back again –

Whisky Taster I know. I know.

Barney To feel all of those things . . . I just can’t . . .

Whisky Taster

‘In the heart of the world,

Like a knife, quivers this truth.

All that lacks love . . . lacks life.’

A flicker of light and colour begins bleeding into the room, as though escaping from the Whisky Taster’s kilt. He exits, and the process stops – Barney holds his head, as though to stop this. . .

But then he relents, despite his anxiety, the pain it causes him, as colour begins escaping from everywhere, anywhere, enveloping the room, no longer black and white. . .

Nicola re-enters, dressed in a bright red dress – a vision. Facing Barney. Smiling. . .

Barney smiles back. . .

Lights down.





Act Two




Scene One


Office. There are noticeably many more colours around.

Barney stands, holding two cups of coffee, waiting.

Nicola strides in, wearing a bright red dress.

Nicola Evening, Barney-boy.

Barney Hello, Nick. Good day? How was everything in finance, how’s data, they all right? They ‘on message’?

Nicola Well apart from me not giving them a single idea of what we’re going to need yet, they’re fine. How did you leave it with Crazy McFucked yesterday, send him packing?

Barney Erm. No. I said he could stay a couple more days.

Nicola Barney!

Barney What, it’s fine. He could still be useful. He –

Nicola Yeah, to you maybe. This isn’t therapy, Barn.

Barney Ther – Yeah, I kn – . . . What?

Nicola God, feeling a bit woozy. After my – (As Timothy.) Boozy late lunch, yah. (As herself.) With those clients from . . . what’s-it. Should have just cancelled after we got this.

Barney We-ell; the tough life of an ad girl, eh? (Handing her a mug of coffee.) Here.

Nicola So here we are, Barn. As the rest of the city is out drinking or arriving home to whoever. Here. We. Are. Thanks for suggesting this.

Barney What?

Nicola Pulling a late one. I know it’s more my head on the block than yours, and . . . Well, I’m just saying thanks for sacrificing your night.

Barney ’S all right. What else am I going to do?

Nicola You’re perky tonight.

Barney Am I?

Nicola (as Timothy) So, ready to do some blue-skying, Charles, bang our heads together, all that, yah?

Barney (as Charles) Totally, man, of course, let’s brainstorm, incentivise, yah, let’s get wet in an ideas shower, great.

Nicola sips her coffee. Almost reels back from its strength.

Nicola What the hell? Barn!

Barney Yeah, all right. ’S no biggie.

Nicola Wowzers, the real thing at last. Christ, it’s got flavour and smell and everything.

Barney (looking at his coffee) ’S nothing. Just. Giving it a try.

Nicola Something happened or what?

Barney What, nothing’s happened, no.

Nicola You wanna be careful, this stuff, might give you a headache, not used to it.

Barney Nah, I’m fine, I’m good to go, I’ve got loads of ideas.

Nicola Really? Wicked!

Barney Yeah, I’ve been thinking more about the blue, in the ‘blue silver gold’, I think it’s really electric, really modern, like it glows, like it’s buzzing, you know?

Nicola I’ve got some music that thingy sent up to me, see / if anything feels right to you.

Barney And the silver’s not like, erm . . . erm, erm, erm, shit, what do I mean, what do I mean? Terminator 2, that guy, the one that melts, metal! It’s not metal, it’s more like, uh, glitter, Glitter spray. The texture of it. Like it sparkles.

Nicola Hmm yeah, all sounding a bit . . .

Barney What?

Nicola I dunno.

Barney What?

Nicola Barney, I dunno! I’m thinking. I mean it feels a bit modern, trendy. We’ve got to keep it classy. Upmarket.

Barney OK. OK, yeah, OK.

Nicola Listen to this one.

Classical music/ instrumental film score plays from Nicola’s computer. They listen.

Nicola Blue, silver and gold?

Barney Er. Dunno. Maybe. No, it’s like loads of them, it’s like everything. Purple, yellow, turquoise, cream. Cream! That’s quite a good id – Actually, no, I’ve / gone off it.

Nicola Hold on, hold on, got loads more.

She presses ‘play’ on another one. They listen.

Barney I like your dress, is it new?

Nicola No, dead old.

Barney Is it?

Nicola Seen it before.

Barney Have I?

Nicola Barney, would you listen?

Nicola plays another track. Barney starts to struggle. Closes his eyes, covers his ears.

Barney Sorry, hold on, it’s fine. I just . . . one minute.

Nicola What, what’s the problem?

Barney (standing again) Nothing. The opposite, no problem. Uh, zig-zags!

Nicola What? Thought you hated them.

Barney Argh. Nah, zig-zags, I’m feeling zig-zags. Let’s . . . let’s talk about zig-zags, maybe as a logo or as a . . . erm . . .

He falters, and sits holding his head. Nicola presses ‘stop’. Silence.

Nicola This is him, this is. Your mate, from across the border. He’s like a piece of fucking kryptonite, he’s broken you.

Barney No, it’s . . . I’m just . . . it’s like it’s all really loud, it’s like it’s all too, too –

Nicola It’s not really loud, it’s fine –

Barney Hold on, please, wait, just . . . I just need a minute to get used . . . I just need a minute, OK. It’s hard.

Beat. Nicola sits. Watches him.

Nicola Shit. Shit, we haven’t got anything, have we?

Barney What?

Nicola We’re screwed; we’ve screwed up. Haven’t we? I’ve screwed up. It’s / Thursday night, and we’re nowhere, we’re just –

Barney No. No, we have things, we have the ‘exclusive’ thing, the, the . . . no, we’ve got stuff. We just . . . I just need to . . . (Sighs.)

Nicola (beat) Oy.

Barney What?

Nicola ‘Eleven benevolent elephants.’ Go.

Barney ‘Eleven benevolent elephants, elephen, eleven benelephant, benevolent elovents.’ Shit.

Nicola (laughs) Never mind. What does benevolent mean?

Barney Uh. Kind. Well-meaning.

Nicola Urgh, knew you’d know it. So clever.

She pours Barney a glass, walking it over to him.

Nicola Come on.

Barney I’m all right, ta.

Nicola Drink it.

Barney I have drank it, Nick. Just –

Nicola Drink it again.

Pause. Barney drinks.

Nicola Well?

Barney (squinting with the strength of it) Loads of things. Loads of . . . so many things . . .

Nicola Well, tell me them. Not cats in bookshops or school chemistry lessons? You’re not holding out on me, Barn, are you?

Barney What? What do you / mean? No.

Nicola Because this is mine and not yours?

Barney Nick, how can . . . ? No, how can / you even –

Nicola All those things you said and felt and tasted in there with him; all those things you always taste and feel and this leaves you just fucking ‘urgh’, does it?

Barney What do you taste, Nick? How about what you bloody taste?

Pause. Nicola takes a quick sip. Sighs.

Nicola Weekends in Southend with my dad. Saturday afternoons in Halfords and B&Q. Running up the stairs in my slippers. The Champagne Bar at St Pancras. Bonfire night.

Barney Really? Well, that’s –

Nicola No. I don’t taste that. I don’t taste a fucking thing. Just booze.

Silence. Nicola drinks. She looks around.

Nicola Reckon we’re the last ones here?

Barney At this time, uh, yeah.

Nicola (beat) I can’t believe I’ve messed this up. Absolutely fucking typical.

Nicola She presses ‘play’ on another piece. She sits and listens. Staring off. Taking the odd sip of vodka.

Barney watches.

Nicola presses ‘stop’. Silence.

Barney OK. OK. Come on. How about . . . bah, bah, bah . . . OK, just thinking a bit left field, for the sake of shits and giggles, heading in the same direction, just, just switching lines. East Coast instead of West Coast. What about we go a bit . . . ? I dunno, like –

He plays Lily Allen’s ‘The Fear’ from his computer.

Like just a shade younger, like . . . you know, like funkier, and . . .

Nicola (listens a little) You hate this, though. You –

Barney I know, I know, I know, but think Camden Market, think Canal Street, think . . .

Nicola We’re not Magners, Barney, this isn’t gonna be a party in your apple orchard, it’s have a quiet sip when you’re on your own.

Barney (presses ‘stop’) True enough. OK. Well, erm . . . (Searching.)

Nicola Get enough of that from my niece, anyway. Loves Lily Allen. Far too young.

Beat. She sips the vodka. Starts half singing lyrics from ‘The Fear’ to herself.

‘I don’t know what’s right or what’s real, any more . . . Don’t know how I meant to feel . . . ’

Barney Chhh-Charlotte?

Nicola Gemma.

Barney Gemma.

Nicola Fuck is Charlotte?

Barney Dunno. How old now?

Nicola Uh?

Barney How old is she?

Nicola Um. Nine. Or . . . yeah, nine. Jesus. Fuck.

Barney All grown-up.

Nicola I know. Still, you joke, but . . . fucking hell. It’s like, the things she wears and things. It’s just, it’s mad. Got a mobile phone, and –

Barney Joking.

Nicola – everything. No, I know.

Barney Nine. Who’s she gonna call? ‘Don’t know they’re born.’

Nicola Uh?

Barney Just. What they say, innit.

Nicola (playing with it in her mouth) (‘Don’t know they’re born’.) Wants to be famous. Reads Heat. And the rest of them. Then again, so do I, so can’t . . .

Barney (tuts) Terrible. Why? Why do you read them? Get a newspaper.

Nicola Boring.

Barney Learn things. The world . . .

Nicola (mocking) ‘Learn things. The world.’ (Drinks.) What did you wanna be? That age.

Barney Uh, an account handler at a prestigious London advertising agency, of course.

Nicola laughs

Barney Dunno. Maybe a teacher. Or writer. Studied journalism. But can’t remember why.

Nicola I wanted to be a dancer. I should have been a dancer. Never give my kid a mobile.

Barney (beat) God. Guess you’ll be . . . you know. Having them soon.

Nicola Yeah. Guess. (Pause. Solemnly.) Yeah, I guess. Jesus. When did that happen? (Beat. Shakes her head.) Fuck, I’m getting married. Still feel about sixteen. It wasn’t that long ago when I was just . . . sixteen.

Barney Still, you know, Jesus. Got, I’ve got friends, family, back at home, who . . . everything. Have . . . house and . . . car and . . . pension schemes, it’s . . .

Nicola See, that’s the problem, I’m surrounded by all my friends from . . . They’ve all been in this position for bloody – (As Timothy.) ‘Not like us, eh? Career, career.’ Huh. (Pause.) Suppose that’s one of the reasons that . . . why I feel that it’s . . . time to . . .

Barney Well. You shouldn’t feel like you have . . . I don’t know, have to rush. Everything happens ten years later. In London. Seriously. Thirty-five down here is, is twenty-five everywhere else. House, marriage, kids, it’s . . . it’s all relative.

Nicola (pours herself a drink) Just goes so fucking fast, man. Pisses me off.

Barney I know. I know. Little things. Like my skin is starting to just look . . . really old. Like the stomach I’m developing, I just look –

Nicola What? Fuck off, you skinny bastard.

Barney I’m just . . . I’m saying that I can, I really . . . And, like, even though I’m not, well I am a little bit, but some of the guys I know, my age, they’re going there – (Points to his hairline.) And I’m like, really? Is that it already? Mid-twenties and your body is already starting to fucking . . . Wind Down.

Nicola You can talk; it’s my fucking eyesight that’s going.

Barney No better?

Nicola (rubbing her eyes) A bit. Maybe.

Barney Do you know what pisses me off? That boys, that lads, they hit their sexual peak at, like, seventeen. Seventeen. And, you know, without giving too much away, I Fucking Wasted Mine. To be frank.

Nicola laughs.

Barney Seriously

Nicola Oh Barney. What we gonna do with you?

Barney I don’t know.

Nicola Need to find you someone. Jenny fancies you, I bet.

Barney No way.

Nicola You don’t know.

Barney I do.

Nicola You never know. I know you never know; you can never tell when / someone –

Barney How do you know?

Nicola I just do, I just know.

She presses ‘play’. More music. She presses ‘stop’.

You know. People often joke about us two. Jenny, and her lot.

Barney What d’you mean? About what?

Nicola You know what, Barn.

Barney No.

Nicola (mock-sighs) OK.

Barney What?

Nicola Just . . . you know, just joking, innit. Because of working together. And everything. How close, and all that. Funny. (Beat. Laughs.) It’s funny, isn’t it? Can you imagine?

Barney . . .

She plays with her glass, contemplatively. She sings, softly, almost to herself.

Nicola

‘Red and yellow and pink and green . . .

Purple and orange and blue . . .

Now I see a rainbow . . . see a rainbow . . . see a rain . . . ’

Silence. Barney watches Nicola. Who stares off. And drinks. Barney begins writing letters on a sheet of paper, top line big, next line smaller. . .

Barney Oy, blind bitch.

Nicola What?

Barney (holding up the sheet) Read the top row; let’s see how bad you really are.

Nicola What? No, fuck off, I’ve had a drink, it won’t be –

Barney Top line, without your glasses.

Nicola Fuck sake, Barn. Meant to be working.

Barney (mock-London) ‘Fuck sake, Barn. Meant to be working.’

Nicola All right, Dick Van Dyke, fucking hell.

Barney Come on.

Nicola (sighs, tries to focus) A. I. P. There.

Barney Very good, next one.

Nicola J. Uh. (Fucking hell) T Z?

Barney Y Z.

Nicola No. Where?

Barney That’s a Y.

Nicola Well, it’s ’cause you write your Ys like Ts. Spacker.

Barney Next one.

Nicola Nah. Can’t see it.

Barney This bottom one?

Nicola No. D?

Barney No.

Nicola See.

Barney (stands, moves closer) Now?

Nicola No.

Barney Say when.

He keeps edging forward . . . and forward. . .

Aw, you’re taking the piss.

Nicola I’m not!

Barney Now?

He moves right in, within reaching distance of Nicola, who grabs his hand, stands and pulls him in for a hug.

Nicola Come here.

Barney What?

Nicola Nothing. Just want a hug.

Pause. She releases him.

You’re so lovely, Barn.

Barney (moving away) Why am I lovely?

Nicola ’Cause you think I’m clever. And no one else does.

Barney That’s not true.

Nicola (teasing) What’s not true, you think I’m clever?

Barney No, ‘that’s not true’ no one – (Tuts.) Fuck off.

Nicola presses ‘play’ on some more music. They listen.

Barney This is good.

Nicola Is it?

Barney This is really . . . Yeah, hold on. Wow! This . . . it really fits, the taste, the vodka, but . . .

Nicola Is it blue, silver and gold?

Barney No, it’s . . . no, it’s . . . really . . . (Beat. Looks at her.) It’s green.

Nicola Green?!

Barney Yeah, green.

Nicola Green’s not . . . that’s not / what we –

Barney No, but it’s perfect – WOW! God, it just keeps coming in bursts. It’s, it’s so ‘deep’, it’s like lime and emerald and luminous and think about it, think about it. Nature, the earth, like what he said, everything he told us, it’s exactly what we’re looking for.

Nicola And that’s what it tastes like, you sure?

Barney Yeah! Yes! It . . . it’s perfect.

Nicola squeals and hops over to him, grabbing and spinning him. They laugh. She takes hold of his face, and brings him in for a ‘smacker’ kiss.

Nicola Aw, Barney. You are amazing, you know that? You really are amazing . . .

Nicola moves in to him again. And they kiss. Properly this time.

They’re suddenly hit by a bright white shaft of light, as the peripheral areas snap to black. The music swells . . . and then fades as we fade to black. . .





Scene Two


The meeting room. More colours. Canvases and posters displaying multicoloured images lie or hang around the room – not too much focus or clarity of thought to them yet – models with vodka, some ‘greenery’, etc. Cuttings and drawings cover the table. The pot plant is dying. Barney opposite Whisky Taster. The vodka on the table. Barney is smiling. He studies Whisky Taster.

Whisky Taster So how’s it going?

Barney (beat, smiles) Interestingly.

Whisky Taster Interesting is good.

Barney (beat, studies him) Do you know what I like?

Whisky Taster What’s that?

Barney You’re gonna find this weird, given my thing with squiggles and things that aren’t – but I love, I Fucking Love, the Circle Line. On the tube. Because in actual fact, the Circle Line isn’t a circle at all, it, it’s almost a square. If you want a straight line, then, then that’s your line. And you know . . . that map. The tube map, I can really, I really get it. Even though normally the colours, all those colours, would normally send me into a bit of a . . . because they’re, because they’re so, because they’re . . . you know that map, it’s . . . it’s actually how the world should be. The first tube map. It was a mess, but it was grabbed and reshaped to create the singular most not-to-scale, seriously, huh, most inaccurate map in the world, but by far, by far, the most . . . beautiful. Everything is straight. Either horizontal, vertical, or 45-degree lines only. And picking out colours that, that just feel right.

That don’t blend or wash over each other. The red Central Line through the middle, that helps the eye to distinguish between north and south. Then the black arrow of the Northern Line piercing through the middle; east and west. The District Line should be green, it just should be; a, a poo-like brown for the Bakerloo, it, it just feels right. And I just – I wish the rest of the world could be so, so easily . . . redesigned. And compartmentalised. And ordered. So that it . . . so that it fits. . . And I think that’s what it’s all about, isn’t it? I’m starting to realise. Making every . . . Does . . . does that . . . ?

He studies Whisky Taster

Barney How are you today, all right? How was . . . ? What were you doing? The other – your daughter. How was that?

Whisky Taster (pause) Uh, fine.

Barney Good to see her?

Whisky Taster Uh, I didn’t see her.

Barney Oh.

Whisky Taster Uh, she wasn’t there.

Barney She wasn’t there?

Whisky Taster She didn’t show up.

Barney Oh.

Whisky Taster I went back to the hotel. Watched television. Those musical channels.

Barney Right.

Whisky Taster You all seem so . . . angry. Why are you so angry with each other?

Barney Erm. Huh. I don’t, uh . . .

Nicola enters. Barney stands, enthusiastically. Whisky Taster instinctively follows him by standing.

Barney Hi Nick, look who it is, I’ve . . . Him. Brought back. Look.

Whisky Taster Hello.

Barney Carry on with where we left off, eh?

Nicola (beat) Why?

Barney (beat) What?

Nicola Why have you brought him back, why is he still here?

Barney Erm. For the. Pitch.

Nicola Why, good copywriter, is he?

Barney No, but –

Nicola We’re way ahead of that now, we’ve got . . . I’m with the graphic des – I’m doing things, Barney, we’re moving forward. And it’s me who has to account for all this money being pissed up the wall – sorry, sir, no offence – but this is my campaign, Barney, I’m responsible, you can’t just do whatever you like.

Barney Erm . . . I just thought. We . . . that we could still use him to. Help us. A bit.

Nicola What? You’re not happy with what we’re doing?

Barney No, it’s not that –

Nicola Or you’ve changed your mind again? Changed your mind about green? It’s now violet or yellow or purple –?

Barney No, but I just . . . I was trying to help, I want to . . . help you, I want us to win it.

Nicola Oh I see. Right. So it’s him who’s changed his mind, is it; willing to taste it now, eh? Well in that case, great. Sorry, I obviously misunderstood.

She opens the bottle, pours a glass of vodka and holds the glass out to him.

Nicola Well, come along, silly. Have a taste.

Whisky Taster A taste?

Nicola Yes, why do you think Barney asked you back?

Whisky Taster I wasn’t sure.

Nicola But you know why we invited you anyway, why we paid for you to come down, that was explained, I believe; we paid for you to come so that you would taste this.

Barney How are you today, Nick, everything OK?

Nicola Yeah, course. Why shouldn’t I be?

Barney Just checking.

Nicola I’m fine thanks. Did you get home OK last night?

Barney I –

Nicola Felt rotten this morning. Did you? Absolute hell. Drank way too much.

Barney No, I was fine. Wasn’t really that drunk.

Nicola I was. Off My Tits. Sir? Would you like some ice?

Whisky Taster May I . . . may I use the bathroom? Please?

Pause, Nicola still holding out the glass. She plonks it down.

Nicola Right out the door, along the corridor, then left, then right.

Whisky Taster (pause) Out the door –

Barney / Right –

Nicola Right out the door, along the corridor, then left then right.

Pause. Whisky Taster slowly wanders out. Nicola busies herself with picking up and putting down cuttings, opening and closing files, not looking at Barney.

Nicola Malcolm wants to see you.

Barney What?

Nicola Malcolm wants to see you.

Barney What about?

Nicola I dunno, just for a catch-up or something. Is this guy all right? I’m not playing games any more, either he tastes it or he doesn’t. I don’t ne – We don’t need him.

Barney Nick –?

Nicola Presentation’s Monday; can’t waste any more time. It’s just . . . (fucking) . . .

Barney We’ll get there, we will. I’ll make sure of it, Nick. We’ll be fine.

Silence. Nicola keeps looking at things. Not Barney.

Barney (pause) Are we . . . ? Even going to mention it? Or . . .

Silence. Nicola turns and finally looks at him properly. She softens slightly, as though about to say something. . .

She returns to opening and closing files.

Nicola You should go and see Malcolm, Barney. OK?

Barney Huh, it might be to fire me, you never know.

Nicola Don’t be stupid, it’s probably to promote you, or give you a pay rise. Maybe ask your advice on Mumbai or something. Well, if he does, please recommend me, all right?

Barney You’d . . . and what, you’d still go? After –?

Nicola Course. Course I would. Why not? After the wedding, fresh start.

Barney After the . . . ? You’d . . . What, you’d take Scott?

Nicola (sarcastically) No, Barney, I’d leave him.

They stand looking at each other. Barney confused. Whisky Taster returns.

Nicola That was quick.

Whisky Taster I couldn’t find it.

Nicola You couldn’t find it?

Whisky Taster No. But –

Nicola Right out the door.

Whisky Taster But that’s –

Nicola Along the corridor, yeah? Then left. And then right. OK?

Whisky Taster I no longer need to go.

Nicola (pause) ‘You No Longer Need To Go’?

Whisky Taster No.

Nicola OK. OK. Well assuming your bladder’s all right, maybe a little drink?

Barney Nick, I don’t think we need to be so . . .

Nicloa (waits) Yes, Barney? ‘We don’t need be so’? ‘We don’t need be so’? (To Whisky Taster.) Sorry about him, sir, he does this occasionally, have days where he expects everyone else to finish his sentences, have you noticed, or just trail off; it’s to keep you in suspense about his ‘amazing’, ‘profound’, ‘insightful’ thought. That doesn’t stop him supplying words for other people’s sentences or correcting them, though. What was that one you did for me the other day? A really good one.

Barney (sighs) OK.

Nicola I mean, he is clever. He is. And . . . and he helps me, all the time, and it’s so lovely of him. It’s . . . like last night, we stayed late, to work, and he helped me. But I think it was the wrong direction to go in.

Barney Wrong direction?

Nicola (to Barney now) It didn’t feel right, Barney. Sorry. Erm . . . So, sir, if you wouldn’t mind getting started on this, that would be great, that / would be excellent.

Barney Nick, do you think maybe we could have a quick / chat outside?

Nicola Though saying that, there are loads of things that annoy me about him, like supplying words for other people’s sentences or correcting them on word use. What was that one you did for me the other day?

Barney I don’t / remember.

Nicola I’ve got one for you. (To Whisky Taster.) What do you think to our images here, sir? Our models? Don’t you think they’re very ‘heterogeneous’. This lot. Eh? (Winks at Barney.) ‘Heterogeneous’.

Barney I don’t know that one.

Nicola (gasping play fully) What? I have discovered one that Barney Munroe doesn’t know? Remember this day! It means ‘diverse’. Barney. Diverse. (Holding the glass out for the Whisky Taster.) Are we ready?

Whisky Taster You remind me a little of my daughter. You know.

Nicola You should see his texts as well; the way he writes his text messages.

Whisky Taster She is very strong willed.

Nicola They’re so proper. Full words. Full stops. You used a semi-colon once.

Barney Did I?

Nicola Yes, you did. Yes You Did, Barney. You must have had to scroll down in the symbols bit and everything.

Barney OK.

Nicola I’m not even sure I know what they’re for. (Laughs.) Truth be told. Not even sure if I know.

Barney I’m not gonna lie to you, this is all a bit beyond me, this is.

Whisky Taster She won’t even see me, now.

Nicola Aw. Little taste of vodka, cheer you up?

Barney You use too many exclamation marks. In everything. Texts, and . . . means they’ve lost all power. / They don’t mean anything any more.

Nicola I like them. Makes everything sound more fun. Cheeky. I use them cheekily. Barney. Ironically. Even. You might say. Perhaps.

Barney Never mind.

Nicola (laughing) Winding you up. So easy for me to wind you up.

Barney Yes, it is.

Nicola Barney’s very clever, you know. He ‘knows things’. He went to university. He sometimes says I’m clever, but I don’t think he thinks it’s true. I can’t often understand what he’s talking about when he’s talking about politics or something like that. Events in history I’m meant to know but don’t.

Barney You could know it. It’s all there.

Nicola Would you taste this, please? Will you / taste this?

Barney If only you took the time to read the paper or watch the fucking news.

Nicola I don’t want to watch the fucking news! Why would I want to do that?!

Barney To find out What Has Happened Today.

Nicola I can guess what has probably happened today, Barney. I can guess that things probably Got Worse. I’d guess that things are probably worse today than they were yesterday, but that they aren’t as bad as they’re going to be tomorrow. I can guess that the hole in the ozone layer probably got bigger. I guess that some starving people probably died because they were hungry. But despite that I’d say that the planet is probably fuller today than it was yesterday. I know that somewhere it rained, somewhere it snowed, and somewhere there was sunshine. I know that a bomb probably went off somewhere. I know that, somewhere, somebody horrible did something horrible to somebody nice! I don’t need to see the news to know that.

Barney You need to see it so that you can change it.

Nicola I Can’t Change It, Barney. I just can’t. Can you?

Barney (Maybe.)

Nicola Huh?

Barney Maybe.

Nicola Well, you go and do that, then. Over the weekend. I’ll finish the pitch. And you save the world. (To the Whisky Taster, holding the glass out.) Would you taste this please?

Whisky Taster looks at the glass, and then at Nicola.

Nicola Will you taste this, please? Will you have some, please? Will you have some of this? Please Will You Taste This? Will you taste this? Will you? Will you taste this?! Won’t you?! Won’t you taste this please?! Will you taste this?! Please! Will you taste?! Will you?! Will you taste?! Won’t you taste this?! WILL YOU TASTE THIS PLEASE?!

Silence. The Whisky Taster takes the glass from her hand. She takes a breath, exhausted, as he sips the vodka. Swallows. And puts the glass down.

Nicola . . . Well?

Whisky Taster It’s . . .

Nicola Yes? . . .

Whisky Taster Empty. Transparent. And bland.

Silence. Nicola nods her head. Turns to Barney, as if to say ‘I told you so’.

Barney It’s all right. It’s OK. We’ll be fine. We’ll make it fine.

Nicola exits. Barney looks at Whisky Taster questioningly. Whisky Taster begins to get ready to leave. Buttoning himself up, picking up his suitcase.

Whisky Taster You know. At the very end of the maturing process, when they prise open the lid of a cask that’s ready . . . you can never completely predict how it will have turned out. That’s what makes each one so special. You can either lament its inconsistencies, work to blend it all out. Or you can celebrate it. And drink it, while it’s strong. Because one thing is certain. Through time . . . the ‘spirit’ begins to evaporate out through the cracks in the side, floating up and up, to become nothing more than a stain on the ceiling. They call it The Angel’s Share.

Whisky Taster is in the doorway. Looking up at the ceiling. He exits. Barney alone.





Scene Three


Meeting room. Colours everywhere now. Malcolm and Barney are standing – Barney paces. Malcolm could have a tie-dyed shirt. Possibly even some colourful make-up, lipstick etc. Looking almost clown-like. He keeps checking the door. A display board at the back of the room, covered in a cloth. An object in the middle of the table. Also covered in a cloth.

Malcolm Going all right. Isn’t it? Very well, I think.

Barney Erm, I . . . I think so.

Malcolm Chris is in a good mood. Well, for him, anyway, huh. And Nicola’s all right on her own? Leading him round Creative and everything, she’s –

Barney Maybe we’re missing something, maybe I can –

Malcolm Missing . . . ? No, it’s going great.

Barney (checking his watch) How long have they . . . ?

Malcolm I’d give them another five.

Barney You don’t think I should go, help her, see if Nick needs any help –? I could . . .

Malcolm Barney, no, it’s fine, stop worrying.

Barney OK.

Malcolm Loads of confidence today, Nicola. Great poise, real commitment, really good. I’ve been so impressed with her. Really. She’s really stepped up, this time. Really proved herself over Mumbai.

Barney (beat) Mumbai, what about Mumbai?

Malcolm The job. Mumbai. I’m thinking about sending Nicola.

Barney Nicola?

Malcolm We had a chat. Last week. I told her this was her chance, opportunity to prove herself, and she really has.

Barney Nicola?

Malcolm (laughs) Yes, Barney. ‘Nicola.’ ‘Nicola.’ If this goes well, with Chris, if she wins this for us, yeah. Why? You don’t want it, still, right?

Barney But . . . but then we’d still be split up.

Malcolm Well, that’s OK, Barney –

Barney We’re the . . . Why would you . . . ? We’re the, the team, everyone says. You do. You know. ‘Dream team’. Huh. All that. So why, / why would . . .

Malcolm Well, I mean, to be honest with you, Barney, I’ve been . . . we’ve all been thinking about pulling you apart for some time now, anyway. It’s . . . you know, I’m not saying ‘me’, but some people, around the agency, some people find you both quite . . . ‘annoying’.

Barney . . .

Malcolm Some people have come to me, and just said they find it all a bit annoying. The cliqueyness, and the in-jokes, and what’s this, something about characters and, and voices? So . . . you know. Maybe it’s just time. ‘All good things . . .’ and all that.

Nicola can be heard laughing, off. Malcolm readies himself. She enters, showing Chris through into the room. Chris, like Malcolm, is very colourful.

Nicola . . . Tell me about it. Still means there’s no need for a gym membership, is there?

Chris No, I suppose not. (To Malcolm and Barney.) All right?

Malcolm Hey, how was it, your little tour.

Chris Yeah, good. Fascinating. Seem to have accumulated a lot of very talented people

Malcolm Ah, well, thanks, you have to, this game. It’s a cut-throat world out there.

Nicola So, feel free to take a seat and we’ll sum up? Barney, do you . . . anything you want to add at this point.

Barney Erm . . .

Nicola Nope, OK. So. Here we are.

She removes a cloth from a display board to reveal the print design.

As you can see, what we’ve gone for as the campaign leitmotifs we know might initially seem quite unconventional, but it’s only unconventional for vodka. OK? But for other drinks, whisky, wine, gin, certainly, you know, bottled water and . . . (Looking at Barney.) What were some of the . . . ? (Waits a bit – nothing.) But, yes, as our Planning people outlined, these are images and associations that our consumer base relate to. So, taking the main campaign colour as green . . . everything you saw, the trees, the, the idea, the connotations of green being nature. Organic. Healthy. Which is all very much the zeitgeist at, at the moment. So for the bar displays, we have forests, woods, lakes in autumn and in summer. Again full of colour and life, ideas of energy, activity, no snow anywhere. And, then . . .

Lifts the cloth from the object on the table to reveal a bottle design.

The bottle. On the front, the thing we’re most proud of. The MacDiarmid poem. Our brand philosophy. (Reading.) ‘Spirit is just this, Not to be like the others.’ So, uh, emphasising the idea of . . . that this isn’t for everyone. We’re not pretending that it is. It’s expensive. It’s unique. It’s for those who truly appreciate it. Correlating with our key brand points of differentiation, exclusivity, uh . . . and speciality.

Nicola clasps her hands, as though finished. Malcolm watches Chris. Silence.

Chris Yeah, it’s all very good . . . (Another pause.) I thought the key colours were going to be blue, silver and gold. I really . . .

Nicola Right, OK. / Erm . . .

Chris I really liked that. Is the only thing.

Nicola Yes, well, Barney I know you had some, uh . . . It was . . .

Nicola looks to Barney. Barney looks like he’s going to speak, like he wants to, looking at Nicola . . . but then doesn’t.

Nicola It’s just, erm, I felt in the in the end that silver and blue were too cold, too hard. We wanted something warmer and, and green is so, so current and yet, I mean, green you . . . you just don’t associate that with vodka, do you?

Chris No. You don’t.

Nicola I mean, Barney, you’re probably better placed to . . . talk about why green.

Barney . . .

Nicola Green? Barney.

Barney . . .

Nicola Barney?

Malcolm Barney.

Barney (pause) Uh . . . erm . . .

Silence. Nicola staring confused at Barney. Chris nods, and begins to leave.

Chris Well. Thank you very much –

Nicola No, wait, don’t go. It’s not finished.

Chris It isn’t?

Nicola No, we’ve . . . There’s . . . You don’t like green? That’s OK, that’s fine. That’s just one of our ideas, isn’t it Malcolm?

Malcolm Yeah.

Nicola But we don’t . . . if you’re not sure, then there’s alternatives, we can give you alternatives. Blue, silver and gold? Fine. Fine, well, that’s . . . yeah imagine . . . an ‘electric’ blue bottle, I’m not just talking blue, I’m talking blue, blue like it’s alive, like it’s buzzing, the brightest, most electric blue you’ve ever seen. The name in pure gold. Then the philosophy, still, the MacDiarmid thing. In bright, sparkly silver. Like I’m thinking younger, maybe, just a bit. Still thinking classy, still thinking quality, but wider, broader, I mean, huh, why let’s limit our market, you wanna shift it, don’t you? You wanna sell the fucking thing. So as well as your good-looking, James Bond-style fella, early forties, leaning against a balcony at the opera, vodka in hand, what about also . . . young professionals. At home. Gorgeous modern flat. The lights of London in the background, they’re high, high up, they’re doing well, Habitat furniture. Abercrombie and Fitch clothing. It’s the evening, they’re kicking back, shoes off, massive corner sofa, vodka. It’s . . . I mean I guess I’m asking for another chance, if you like that, then fine, if that’s what you prefer, fine, let us come back to you, let’s give it another go.

Chris (long pause) I really do like blue, silver and gold.

Nicola Great.

Malcolm Great.

Chris (beat) Let me have a think.

Nicola Thank you –

Malcolm Thank you. Chris.

Chris I’ll be in touch.

Nicola I’ll show you out.

Malcolm See you, Chris, thank you.

Chris Bye.

Malcolm Bye.

Chris exits, followed by Nicola, who shoots Barney daggers as she goes.

Malcolm Wow. I mean . . . I mean, Barney, wow, you were . . . ah-uh, ah-uh-ha-ha, that was, yeah, quite something. I mean . . . I mean, what the fuck?!

Barney What? It . . . it was –

Malcolm You’re embarrassing, you’re a fucking embarrassment, do you know that?

Barney It was Nicola’s pitch, I was just / letting her –

Malcolm What’s your problem? Hmm? What is it? (Laughs.) My God, you lot. Fucking hell. You moan about not being given any chances, but even when I do give you one, you fuck it up! Both of you, in fact, Jesus.

Barney Malcolm, you’re completely wrong, but I don’t care enough to want to change your opinion, so –

Malcolm (long laugh) You can’t stand me. Can you?

Barney Erm . . .

Malcolm It’s OK. I don’t mind. And I know why. But it isn’t my fault I’m where I am, Barney. I can’t help that.

On the contrary, I offered to promote you, rather heroically, instead of . . . well –

Barney Well, you . . . huh, you offered to send me away / from every . . .

Malcolm Stop fucking interrupting. You hate me because of all the things I’ve had that you will never have; underwhelming, as you might find me. Lacking in any discernible superhuman gift, as I may be. Well, I’m sorry about that. I’m sorry I was born into a time that allowed me to succeed and you’ve been born into one that is going to fuck you over.

That task I set you. The question I asked you which you have singularly failed to answer, which is why this whole vodka pitch has been wrong from the start, is ‘Why Do You Drink?’

They drink, so that they can forget, that they work all week to earn money, to get to the weekend, to buy drink that helps them to forget that they spend all week working, to earn money, so that they can drink. ‘Generation Y’, fucking hell yeah, ‘Generation Why’. Generation ‘Why the fuck?’ I hand you something on a plate and you piss it away. This account, Mumbai, it’s pathetic, Barney, you deserve all you fucking get. Or ‘don’t get’, I should say.

Barney Well. I happen to think that is massively unfair. And even if it were true, I don’t blame them –

Malcolm No, I don’t blame them, fuck it, if I were your lot, I’d fucking drink. Can’t get a house, aw sorry, we’ve got them all, and shit, sorry, we’ve spent all that inherited wealth that’s been passing down the generations on second homes and cars and holidays. But that’s OK, you’ve been very patient, waiting your turn, but now – oh no! – there’s no money left, we spent it, and there’s less jobs, crikey, so tighten your belts. I would go away, travel, escape, but you can’t really because we did that too much and now the planet needs saving. But the tragic thing is, the real crime, Barney, whatever you hate me for or blame me for, the biggest fucking crime of all is that none of you are angry enough to do anything about it. If this had happened to us, my God, we’d have set the place on fire. We were, we were changing everything, questioning everything, but you lot, God! You just shrug. And follow us. Do what we did. Go to uni still, even though when we went, it meant something. And you rent. From us. And pay your taxes, for our pensions and our retirement, none of which you will get to enjoy yourselves. That’s why you drink. You’re a stop-gap. An interval. And the worse thing is you don’t even care. But you, Barney, I see it, you do care. And you / hate me for it.

Barney OK. OK, erm, so yeah, how is that second home, incidentally? Not going into arrears, I hope. What about your investments, Malcolm, tumble did they? Yeah, yeah, yeah, I really envy you with your ‘everything’. But do you know what, actually –

Malcolm I think we’re actually done, here, / Barney, all right?

Barney No, I’m pleased that we have nothing. Because it means in all of this, while you lot stress and fret around, because out of the two hundred grand you made on your house last decade, it’s gone down by a tiny fraction, we’ve lost nothing, because we don’t have anything to lose. And I imagine you sometimes probably envy us that, / as much as you pity us. All right?

Malcolm Is it all just because of her? Why you turned it down? You don’t want to leave her? Because I’ll tell you / something –

Barney All that – yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, all that you’ve had that we never will, fair enough. So go ahead, I say, send round the bailiffs, lose one of your two cars, repossess and foreclose / and fucking . . .

Malcolm I’ll tell you this, the offer’s back on the table. One last chance. Because if you don’t take it, and piss off, then you’re out anyway. Gone. / Simple as.

Barney Yeah, just foreclose on the whole fucking lot of you.

Malcolm Barney, shhh. Listen. Listen to me. (Pause.) Go to Mumbai. Or go fuck yourself.

Silence. They stare at each other. Nicola enters. Malcolm leaves. Silence.

Nicola You prick. You little fucking prick; only you could ruin this.

Barney . . .

Nicola Why . . .?

Barney . . . I’ve . . . never wanted anything except for . . . for you to do well, for us to do well. As a team.

Nicola A team? Ha. A team, he says. I’m left drowning, waving for help, and he says ‘a team’.

Beat. Barney tentatively goes to her but she slaps his chest. He grabs her hand. As she tries to pull it back, she pulls Barney into her, as they stumble back together, breathing erratically, looking at each other, trying to work the other one out. Nicola slaps him on the chest again and moves away.

Barney Ouch.

Nicola Oh yeah, right, you fucking weakling. What?! What did I do wrong, eh? What have I done? What am I meant to have done, Barney?! What am I meant to be doing? I DON’T KNOW WHAT I’M SUPPOSED TO BE DOING!

A moment, before she slaps him on the chest again.

Barney Don’t. That hurt.

Nicola (mimicking) ‘Don’t, that hurt’.

She puts her hands over her face. Beat. She lashes out at his face.

Barney Stop it.

Nicola ‘Stop it’. God! That’s one thing I wouldn’t miss, your constant whining –

Barney Stop it –

Nicola – and your whinging, it’s all . . . everything about you, it’s just so wet.

Barney If it makes you feel better to say hurtful things to me because you feel bad you betrayed your boyfriend, then / go ahead.

Nicola Oh, would you get over yourself, Barney! Jesus. It was Absolutely Nothing. OK? Jesus, you’re meant to be the smart one, but maybe not. Maybe not.

Barney Maybe not.

Nicola No, maybe not. Maybe you’re not as brilliant as you think you are, Barney. Anyone can be born with something. But it takes a very different person to make themselves something out of nothing. Because did you see that there? Did you witness that just then, Barney? I may have just saved our fucking asses. I just saved my chance to climb up the ladder away from you, and go and live in India as soon as is absolutely fucking possible. Because, yeah, do you know what, that’s right, Malcolm told me. Last week. Malcolm wants to send me to Mumbai. OK? Because maybe he saw something in me and that’s why I was picked, and not you. So yes. Barney.

Barney Yeah, maybe that’s right, maybe you are smarter.

Nicola Yeah.

Barney Oh, by the way, Nick, it’s because Newcastle already has a lot of coal. You fucking idiot.

Nicola (beat) Last week. After it happened. I went home. And fucked my fiancé. And it was amazing. To be held by a real man. After feeling like I was a doll, a doll being fumbled over by a little girl.

Barney tries to brush that off, but it looks like it’s broken him. He starts to waver.

Nicola Now, if you’ll excuse me –

Barney I was offered Mumbai.

Nicola . . .

Barney And I turned it down.

Beat. Nicola tries to give a ‘bothered’ shrug, but she slowly starts to break.

And then she really does. Clutching at her mouth, bending over.

So does Barney.

Nicola allows herself almost to fall to the floor, and sits down.

Barney gets on to his knees. Holds himself a little.

They sit on the floor for a moment, away from each other.

Nicola tries to gather herself. She slowly stands, brushes herself down, wipes her eyes, and walks uneasily out. . .

Barney alone. The ‘green’ music plays.





Scene Four


The rooftop. The colourful lights of the city. Barney and Nicola stand facing each other, wrapped up against the cold. Nicola smokes. She looks like she’s been crying.

Barney Was it mutual, or . . .

Nicola Um . . . kind of. More . . . more him. I guess.

Barney I’m. Sorry.

Nicola (tries to laugh, wave it off) That’s . . . It’s . . . Huh. It’s fine. (It’s fine.) Back to the drawing board. Eh? ‘While there’s still time.’ Huh . . . Doesn’t matter anyway, does it? Won the vodka account. So I got the job. So I’m off. So fu-fuck it. Huh. What about you? What will you do? Now. With . . . all your spare time and everything.

Barney I. Don’t know. Erm. Might actually – I might take up the writing. Thing. Again. Try and do some . . . I don’t know, articles, or . . . short – I don’t . . . but . . . Might go away. For a bit, first. I’ve not . . . seen anything. I’ve always been too . . . It’s always felt like it would be too . . . but I . . . I think I’m . . .

Nicola Oh God, though, you’re not going to be one of those are you? (As Timothy.) ‘Go away and find yourself, yah?’

Barney No, I . . . no. Just . . .

Nicola Where?

Barney Dunno. The usual. Just . . . Never done Scotland, though. Incidentally. I might start there.

Nicola Maybe you could swing by Mumbai. One time.

Barney Yeah. Maybe.

Nicola smokes. Beat. Smokes.

Nicola Or maybe you could just co –

She stops, losing confidence.

Barney What?

Nicola looks like she’s about to say it . . . but then doesn’t. She thinks. She looks at him. She smiles bravely. She’s really about to say it. But then doesn’t. Smokes.

Silence. Barney makes to exit.

Barney I’m gonna. Head down.

Nicola Told you. Rubbish in the cold.

Barney Yeah. I’ll see you –

Nicola So really, you’re really just going to go away, and that’s it, you’re not . . . I’ll nev –

Barney I’m sorry.

Nicola That’s OK. What? Why? Don’t be, I was just . . . I wasn’t . . . anything. No, that’s OK.

Barney You’re just –

Nicola You don’t have to. (Quick beat.) What?

Barney You’re too. Colourful.

Silence. Nicola goes back to smoking. Barney makes to leave again.

Barney Anyway.

Nicola Yeah. Bye.

Beat. Barney stops.

Barney It’s, um. It’s white. By the way.

Nicola What is?

Barney You know what. What you asked me that time. Its colour . . . Boring, I know. Not bright red or sparkling or . . . it’s just white. And bright. Really bright. Just a complete absence of anything else. And silent, as well. No noise. And it smells really warm and tastes really young and feels a bit like when you miss a step on the stairs . . . And I cannot tell you how bright it is . . .

Snow starts to fall. Only a little at first, and then more. Barney looks up, as Nicola slowly disappears, and the colours from the city, and those all around him, begin to fade back into black, white and grey.

Barney smiles, as he closes his eyes, and lets the snowflakes fall on to his face. . .

Lights down.





The Man





Cast List


The Man was first first performed at the Finborough Theatre, London, on 25 May 2010. The play was performed by a rotating cast of actors, including:

Ben

Samuel Barnett





Leander Deeny





James Graham





George Rainsford



Inland Revenue

Michelle Luther



Stephanie Thomas

Lizzy Watts



Director Kate Wasserberg

Designer Fly Davis

Lighting Designer Tom White

Production Photography Matt Humphrey

Stage Manager Eleanor Randal





How the play works


As the audience enter, they are given a receipt at random that corresponds with the individual stories listed here in the text.

Following the opening exchange between Ben and the Inland Revenue, the actor playing Ben begins choosing receipts from the audience in a random order, performing the story that corresponds with that particular receipt. Consequently, no one show is ever the same. The opening exchange and the final exchange between Ben and the Inland Revenue are the only segments of the play whose position is guaranteed.

The exchanges between Ben and the Inland Revenue that are not related to specific receipts must be added in by the actor whenever he sees fit within the journey of the performance.





Notes from the original performance


When The Man premiered at the Finborough Theatre, the actors playing the Inland Revenue performed live as opposed to being recorded voices. They sat within the audience – part of it, if slightly removed (i.e. to the side or to the back). This seemed effectively to contribute to the live, interactive feel of the ‘event’.

As implied by the text, the Inland Revenue is more than a single character. There is ‘Lisa’, a woman with whom Ben speaks most, but also in one segment there is a suggestion that the Inland Revenue changes person during one of Ben’s calls. As before, the original production placed a separate character in a different part of the audience. All of this is up for grabs.

The presence of the Sainsbury’s receipts should help to combat the unpredictability of audience numbers in any given show (i.e., once the number of ‘key story’ receipts has been taken up, extraneous Sainsbury’s receipts can be handed out to all additional audience members). At the opposite end of the spectrum, a smaller audience can be given more than one receipt.

It’s easier than it looks. And more fun, too.





Characters



Ben

Inland Revenue





Simon and Garfunkel’s ‘The Boxer’ plays as lights up on Ben, staring out, awkwardly holding a handful of tax forms. The song fades from intro music into the more tinny sound of ‘on-hold’ music, as Ben stands waiting for his call to be taken.

The music cuts out.

Inland Revenue Hello, HM Revenue and Customs, Lisa speaking.

Ben Oh, no, it’s me again, I’m still on hold.

Inland Revenue It’s who, sorry?

Ben Ben.

Inland Revenue You’ve been transferred through to Self-Employment.

Ben Oh God, sorry, you sounded like the last girl. Woman.

Inland Revenue That’s OK. How can I help?

Ben My tax return, I can’t do it.

Inland Revenue Can I take your name please?

Ben Ben Edwards, 8th of the 2nd ’82, 54D Elmbourne Road, London SW17 1XT, / United Kingdom.

Inland Revenue Just your name is fine, actually.

Ben Ben Edwards.

Inland Revenue And what’s your tax reference number?

Ben I don’t know, that’s what I’m ringing to find out.

Inland Revenue It should be on your Self-Assessment form.

Ben Well, erm, which one? I’ve got lots.

Inland Revenue It should be on all of them, actually. Which one are you looking at now?

Ben Uh, I dunno; white with green writing.

Inland Revenue What number is it, the form?

Ben Where’s that number?

Inland Revenue It should be just above your tax reference number.

Ben . . . Right, but –

Inland Revenue You know there’s a series of numbers at the top of the form?

Ben Yeah.

Inland Revenue Read a couple of them out to me.

Ben 0-8-4-5, 3-0-0 . . .

Inland Revenue That’s sounds like the phone number you rang.

Ben The ph – . . . Oh yeah.

Inland Revenue Is your National Insurance number there?

Ben Yeah.

Inland Revenue (pause) Can I have that then please?

Ben 0-8-8-9-

Inland Revenue Sorry, it should start with two letters.

Ben You said you wanted the number.

Inland Revenue National Insurance numbers are made up of letters and numbers, so if you –

Ben No, I know, I wasn’t being funny or – Sorry, it’s just I / can’t stand these types of . . .

Inland Revenue If you read out the whole thing then, please?

Ben Hold on, there’s a number on the side, is that it?

Inland Revenue That’ll be the form you’re holding; what’s that number?

Ben SA100-23F.

Inland Revenue Right. OK. Well your unique reference number should be right at the top above your employer reference but below your National Insurance number.

Ben Below the . . . (hold). . . Right, 919/01/XP3504.

(Waits.) Hello?

Inland Revenue I’m just processing that now, sir.

Ben Oh no, sorry, I thought you might have been cut off, I wasn’t being rude.

Is it raining in Wrexham?

Inland Revenue No. Is it raining in London?

Ben No.

Why am I with the / Wrexham office –?

Inland Revenue OK, I’ve got your details up, Mr Edwards, how can I help?

Ben I’ve got stuck on my Self-Assessment form.

Inland Revenue Oh. Nice and early. If you file online it doesn’t have to be with us until the 31st of next January.

Ben No I’m not doing it online, I’m doing the paper one.

Inland Revenue We do recommend filing / online, Mr Edwards –

Ben No I can’t, I just can’t, I’m not doing it online.

Inland Revenue OK. So you’re stuck; how far have you got, which question?

Ben Question 1.

Inland Revenue Que – . . . Name?

Ben No, on my form, the red page with ‘Employment’ at the top, it says to write down how much I earned from either my P45 or my P60.

Inland Revenue Right.

Ben Well. Which one? P45 or P60?

Inland Revenue Whichever one you’ve got.

Ben I’ve got both.

Inland Revenue One must be out of date.

Ben They’ve both got the same date on.

Inland Revenue There must be a mistake.

Ben Well, you sent them to me. Do you see what I mean – do you see why I’m confused?

Inland Revenue What are the amounts on each of them?

Ben There aren’t any.

Inland Revenue There aren’t any?

Ben No, there are – . . . I haven’t had any regular employed work.

Inland Revenue Then you don’t need to fill that in, just go straight to the self-employment section, OK?

Ben OK. And that’s just the next page is it?

Inland Revenue Yes. And that should all be fine, OK? Anything else I can help you with?

Ben I don’t think so.

Inland Revenue All right, then. Well, you’ve been speaking / to Lisa, and –

Ben Hold on, wait, don’t go, I’m stuck again.

Inland Revenue OK.

Ben Question 1 on this page: business name. I don’t have a business name.

Inland Revenue You’re self-employed, correct?

Ben Yes.

Inland Revenue So you are your business, basically. You just have to write in your name.

Ben Ben Edwards?

Inland Revenue Yes. That’s the name of your business.

Ben Huh. My name is the name of a business.

Inland Revenue Yes.

Ben (smiles) That’s pretty . . . (Stops smiling.) scary.

Inland Revenue You’ll be fine, I’m sure.

Ben . . . Yeah? I get so . . . nervous about these things. They. Erm. Upset me. A little bit. I’m not used to them.

Inland Revenue Some people do find them a little stressful.

Ben Do they? Other people?

Inland Revenue Yes, that’s why we’re here. To guide you through the form.

Ben To ‘gui –’ . . . OK.

Inland Revenue Oh, look at that. Huh. Outside. It’s just started to rain . . .

Ben . . . Has it?

Inland Revenue Yeah. Just a little bit. And I didn’t bring my umbrella.

Ben Oh no.

Inland Revenue That’s all right, I only have to run out to the car.

Ben What car do you drive?

Inland Revenue Just a little Peugeot 206.

Ben What colour?

Inland Revenue Blue.

Ben What engine?

Inland Revenue Ooh crikey, now you’re asking. Er, 13 . . . 1360? I think. CC. Or something.

Ben Right.

Inland Revenue How about you?

Ben Oh no, I don’t drive, don’t know anything about cars.

Inland Revenue Oh, OK.

Ben Can’t make out anything you just told me, actually. ’Cept maybe ‘blue’.

Inland Revenue (laughs) Right.

Ben (laughs) Huh.

Inland Revenue OK. Well do contact us again with any other queries –

Ben Will I come back to you?

Inland Revenue Not necessarily, there are quite a lot of us.

Ben Can I . . . Sorry, if this is – if this sounds . . . erm, but can, can I ask for you? Maybe. Or –

Inland Revenue Erm. Yes, if . . . if you like.

Ben What do I say, just Lisa? ‘Is Lisa there, please?’

Inland Revenue I can give you a reference number if you like. Just give that to the first one who answers and if I’m working, they’ll transfer you through.

Ben Are you sure?

Inland Revenue Yeah, course. Any little problem you might have, just call.

Ben . . . You might regret that.

Ben steps out of his spot.

A desk, covered in forms. Shoe boxes and shopping bags of receipts everywhere.

An empty box which says ‘Expenses’, another which says ‘Not Expenses’.

Ben This is a test.

I’m, erm . . . I’m not sure how it, it’s going to, erm, work, but it’s an idea, from this guy I’m seeing – not seeing ‘seeing’, like that kind of seeing, I just mean ‘seeing’, seeing, as in someone that I see, to talk to. Well not talk, really, because he doesn’t say anything, he just sits there and listens to me, four till five, every second Friday.

But some other people have said they think it’s a good way to do it. Not only to complete the actual, erm . . . form. (Shiver.) The form. But also as a, like, a ‘useful opportunity’ to uh . . . well go through some of the . . . some of the other, erm, things. That have been, erm . . . going on. Kind of thing. If that . . .

I just. . . huh, honestly, sometimes, I don’t know how I literally get through each day. Something takes over. A nervous, heart-racing, erm . . . ‘ness’. And I just surrender to it.

I find a lot of things . . . ‘difficult’. I feel like I’m behind on a lot of things, grown-up adult things, and I’m . . . and it’s like I’m trying to catch up.

And, yes, forms are particularly bad, I just have no confidence, and the only thing forms really need is confidence, it just needs you to erm . . . to commit. Commit to knowing something. You know on Who Wants to be a Millionaire when the contestants always say, ‘Well, it’s different when you’re actually sat in the chair, instead of just watching at home, you start to doubt everything you’ve ever known.’ Well. That’s a bit like what minute-to-minute, hour-to-hour life is like for me. A lot of the time.

This is my first tax return.

I’ve been pretending I don’t have to do one and all year I’ve just been throwing my receipts, everything, into, into these shoe boxes and shopping bags and just kind of assuming it would all work out. Like maybe some little Inland Revenue elves would turn up in the night, like tooth fairies, and start filing everything. All the while chanting, ‘Tax doesn’t have to be taxing. Tax doesn’t have to be ta – . . .’

But they haven’t. And so now I have to do it.

Some people have said ‘Take it to an accountant,’ but, urgh, just the idea of handing all my receipts over, to someone I don’t know, them rifling through . . . I couldn’t, that’s . . . No, I couldn’t. It would be like . . . standing there naked and having a . . . no. Couldn’t.

They’re a record of what we buy. Aren’t they? And what we buy says, you know, a lot about, you know . . . Who We Are. Especially now, in this day and . . .

About what we need. Erm. Value. How much we’re willing to pay for something.

And how often. And . . .

So, yes, it’s an absolute mess, yes. And I have literally no idea what you can put in as a business expense and what you can’t. Literally not a clue. So every single time I exchanged money for something else, there’s a record of it here. The ones you’re holding are barely the tip of the . . . death-hell. Erm. So let’s . . . shall we . . .

Picks a member of the audience.

What have you got? What’s your receipt for? Thank you . . .

SAINSBURY’S RECEIPT – ANY DATE

Ben Oh, this is from the Sainsbury’s on Balham High Road – do you know it?

I can finally walk in there with my head held high – well, not high, just, you know, at the . . . normal gradient. But in those early months, when I first quit my proper job, and became, uh, ‘self-employed’, I didn’t have – oh God – I didn’t have any money. It was before my granddad’s inheritance came through.

So shopping, those first few months in Sainsbury’s, I’d have rehearsed my, erm, my ‘indignation’ routine, at my card not going through. Just in case. ‘What? Urgh, that bank, I can’t believe they’ve done it again, they said they’d activated the card, grrr, I’m so cross. With them.’ Kind of thing. You know, pretend I was off to withdraw some cash instead, ranting about how, how the banking system needed to pull its socks up, or something, and then, and just, never go back.

The irony of not having enough money on my Oyster Card to travel into town to meet a client to earn money to put on my Oyster Card was not lost on me. I’d have to call up Mum or Dad, ask them to top it up for me online. Which really hampered my ‘I’m absolutely fine, I know what I’m doing, Dad,’ argument.

Hated having to borrow money from them continually. My mum and dad aren’t exactly . . . well, think of some rich mums and dads; they’re not them. But they worried about me. On my own, down here. Obviously. Given my complete . . . erm . . . well, given what I was like. When I was growing up.

Steps into his ‘Inland Revenue’ spot again.

Inland Revenue It can only be expenses directly related to the running of your business.

Ben Oh. OK. Yeah. But I don’t know what that means. Like these Sainsbury’s receipts.

Inland Revenue Is it for stationery or postage stamps or anything like that?

Ben No, it’s for broccoli and some hummus.

Inland Revenue Then you can’t claim it as expenses, I’m afraid, as it didn’t contribute to the success of your business.

Ben It kept me alive. Isn’t being alive directly contributing to the success of my business?

Inland Revenue I’m afraid not, no. Not technically.

Ben Not technically?

Inland Revenue No.

Ben So no food.

Inland Revenue Try to think of it as being like . . . well, you know in your previous jobs?

Ben Yeah.

Inland Revenue You didn’t have to pay for the phone calls yourself, or for printing anything out or posting anything, did you? The company did that.

Ben Yeah.

Inland Revenue Well, you have to pay for all of that yourself, now, don’t you; so this is just collecting all those receipts together, adding up what are business expenses, and then taking them off the total amount you earned. So say if you earned twenty thousand, but two thousand of that was spent on your business, we’ll only tax you on eighteen.

Ben Right. OK. Erm. Right, yeah, OK, cool, thank you.

Steps out of his spot.

Does anyone have any other food ones, Sainsbury’s, then, or . . . ? (Begins collecting the receipts up.) Sorry. That was a waste of time, giving you those. Thank you.

BEERCAN DRINKING HAT – 13 AUGUST 2009

Ben Oh, this was a birthday present for Josh. One of those – have you seen them, like Homer Simpson hats, a beer can either side, and straws that . . . it was a joke, him being too stiff sometimes to actually pick up a can, or a pint of . . .

I can joke about it, see. Being the twin. It’s sort of allowed.

Actually, though, one of the amazing things about us – not amazing, sorry, ‘we’re amazing’, I didn’t mean it like that, but the . . . interesting, the interesting thing about me and Josh – erm, Josh and I (sorry, horrendous, today), is that I was born on a day all to myself, and so was he. Despite being twins.

You do hear it happening now and again, sometimes in extreme cases, when labour spans midnight, kind of thing. There’s this case happening now about . . . I think it’s the Conway twins, born either side of the September 1st cut-off point for the academic year, and the local school is saying the older twin has to start in one year, and the younger one has to wait to start the next – I know. Mad. There have been twins born in different years technically, either side of New Year’s Eve. And, for that reason, the Hegenberger twins have a whole millennium separating them. So . . .

We’re not that, erm, interesting. But essentially Josh was born at 11.56 p.m on the 7th of February, which in 1982 was a Monday, and I was born at 12.04. Which was a Tuesday. So that’s only eight minutes separating us. But one whole day.

Beat. Thinks. Goes to say something. Doesn’t. Beat. . .

OK. Erm . . .

Right, OK, erm, so this thing with Josh . . .

So they thought something was wrong with both of us, actually, as soon as we were born. They only had to look at our toes. Both our big toes bend in towards the little toes; I won’t show you; hate it. I never get my feet out. Ever. Swimming. In the flat. Ever.

But it took Josh’s first accident for the doctors to work out it was FOP.

FOP stands for Fibrodysplasia Ossific Progressiva. Which is really hard to say if you’ve never said it before, but Eve said it about a hundred thousand times. So.

It basically means that bone grows where it shouldn’t. When a normal person bruises themselves or breaks a bone, the bone repairs itself. Yeah? With FOP people, extra bone grows into the damaged area. So, like, for example if an FOP person fell into a wall and broke his or her arm, the muscle there, as it’s repairing, might actually be replaced with bone. And it’s very hard to stop this from happening and there’s no cure and so over the course of your life you eventually grow something akin to a second skeleton. Which can make it really difficult for you to move and in some cases breathe.

I think Josh first got taken to hospital when he was about one and a half after cracking his elbow against the kitchen table leg – I don’t remember any of this, obviously. And that’s when they found out we had it. Well that’s when they found out Josh had it. I hadn’t had any accidents so I hadn’t developed any extra bone yet.

There’s, erm . . . huh, there’s this famous church with a crooked spire in Chesterfield. We hadn’t always lived there, moved around a bit, born in Guildford actually, hence the slight odd – (Points to his mouth.) But I remember Granddad once making a joke about Josh, when he was looking a little stiff as he got older, being like that crooked Chesterfield spire. It Did Not Go Down Well with my mum.

But he was so, so, so much braver than I was. Josh. As kids. He was so determined that it wouldn’t stop him doing things. Mum would . . . she’d never let us go out and play in the street or do sports or anything. At first. FOP sufferers aren’t meant to run. They’re not meant to jump. Or ride bikes. Slide down the banister. Or do a lot of things. Basically. Me, I was fine with that, some of the things sounded so . . .

He was a massive Michael Jackson fan. I didn’t get it myself, At All, but Josh was obsessed. He’d try all the moves. Which he wasn’t supposed to, obviously, but he’d show me the things he was working on, as I sat on my bed. That twist and kick with the leg. The moonwalk, naturally. Accidents happened. As they do. He kicked our desk with his foot, fracturing his ankle. Banged his shoulder against our wardrobe. And the flare-ups started to happen – that’s what they’re called. Flare-ups. And it would get harder and harder for him to moonwalk, because he was growing this extra bone, but he’d keep going. Showing off in the playground.

I think it was in the last year of primary school that Dean Rogers accidentally kicked me in the wrist. He was meant to kick the bag of rubbish I was taking out of the dining hall – it was my turn. Rota, thing. Dean always did that to the person taking the rubbish out but despite years of practice he was still bafflingly imprecise, and his boot connected with my wrist instead, and it hurt, really hurt, so I fainted.

‘Caterpillar’. ‘Boots for an angry generation’.

Anyway, that’s when they found out. I was fine. I was absolutely fine. Not one extra bit of bone grew. It just healed. Perfectly.

I didn’t have it.

But my toe? I know. No one could explain it. Doctors joked that it was a ‘sympathy toe’. Growing up together in the womb. Or something.

Worse thing is, though, it didn’t matter. Really. I didn’t change, I didn’t want to do any of those things, still. Run. Jump. Roll. Ride anything I was happy just. . . opting out of it all.

But anyway, so yes, the beercan hat was a present for Josh. Don’t think that’s really an expense, do you?

RETURN TRAIN TICKET BALHAM TO PECKHAM RYE – 17 MAY 2009

Ben Peckham, right, well all these train tickets to Peckham, if there are any more, these are just. . . that’s where Rachel lived. Lives, still. I assume.

In fact, May, God, well, yeah, this would be the last time I, erm . . . I went over to see her. Things had been a little . . . ‘off’ for a bit. A while. This was kind of a ‘summit’ meeting. I don’t think I knew what was going to come out of my mouth. What it was I wanted. Still.

She’d always been about three divisions out of my league. Like she was Premiership, and I was Vauxhall Conference.

Or whatever they call it now. Stupidly pretty, this amazing blonde hair, in like a bob – is that what’s. . . ? (Demonstrates.) And she was a dancer, well, dance choreographer. So. You know.

I’d left my job at the council and been trying to get the website thing going, so I was really all over the place. But then again she, she was the one who was out, working at that fucking Hoxton bar place (sorry, swearing, just showing off), at this bar in the evenings and I hated going there. All the guys she worked with looked like they’d stepped out of GQ magazine, and they all looked at me with amazement that . . . that she was . . . you know, asking, like, ‘Why?’ I don’t know, ask her, if it’s so . . .

Maybe there’s only so many times you can be asked that before you start . . .

We went to the White Horse. This time. Didn’t want to go to her house, better if it was neutral ground. If we decided to stay together, then I’d be going back to hers, of course, but . . .

She’d been crying a bit, so she was wearing sunglasses but I remember it feeling like the first really proper day of spring, first hot one anyway so it didn’t look odd.

She’d given up trying by that point, I think. And we were just there to . . . finalise.

It’s so idiotic really. That it was me leaving her. I’m sure she realises that now.

It’s just it had been, it’d been, like, three years, and I know that’s hardly a lifetime, but at . . . I suppose I started to realise at this age, at our age, after that long with someone, you’re meant to . . . aren’t you? Do something ‘more’. Grow up, I suppose. But I . . . . I didn’t – it didn’t feel. Right. Erm. Because I suppose that literally really is becoming a grown-up, isn’t it? Saying bye to being young, to being . . . saying bye to the future being possibly anything. And instead saying, no, it’s going to be specifically this. For ever.

You have little bits of it creeping in during your twenties. Breaking you in to the idea of ‘manhood’. Huh. Twenty-five I remember was pretty tough; handing your Young Person’s Railcard back – ‘Oh, you want it back, oh OK, why, sorry? Oh I see, I’m not young any more,’ Twenty-five? Jesus. That’s when you leap up a block on questionnaires, too; now I tick the ‘25 to 34’ box – ‘Really, you’re not differentiating between me and a thirty-four-year-old? OK. Fine.’

The ‘25 and over’ category in The X Factor. That one where they all say, ‘But it’s my last chance!’

Twenty-five.

(Looks at the ticket.) Oh. God, hmm. I’d, uh . . . I’d bought a day return.

Maybe I had known what was going to come out of my mouth after all.

COMPUTER / WEBCAM / SOFTWARE, JOHN LEWIS – 21 MARCH 2009

Ben Oh, yeah, this . . . oh God, my new computer and stuff. Oh well, this can definitely go in. Can’t it? Yeah?

I was so stressed. Computers, it’s like the form thing again. You have to commit, when you’re clicking on something, saying yes to something, saying cancel to something, and I just don’t . . . ‘function’. Like that. So . . .

But I needed a computer and I needed a webcam and I needed a lot of other things for my business. For the thing I was going to do. Luckily – I bought him lunch and a pint afterwards – luckily Neil was in town that day, my web designer, and he agreed to go with me to John Lewis, because basically if any of the sales staff approached me I’d buy the thing I was standing next to at the time and probably a fridge freezer and anything else they offered me because I’m just rubbish at that.

Maybe I should tell you what I . . .

OK. Yeah. Basically my business is this. I teach. Give seminars. Online. I post videos, which I record, of me teaching. There you go.

Anything from, uh, history, quite a bit. English Literature. For GCSE, I’m talking. And A Levels. For students to watch online. And anyone, really. See what you do is subscribe, only a tiny little amount, each month, and then you get access to any of my videos – I’d show you some if I had . . . and I also do these online forums where you can (what do you call it) just type in with your questions, live, and then I answer them live, kind of thing.

And I know what you’re thinking. That I am probably the worst person to be doing something like this. Possibly some of you are parents and are thinking, ‘Really? This guy, in my living room? Speaking to my children? Hmm.’

But oddly enough, for whatever reason . . . I think it’s because I care so much.

I gave an example to everyone, all my friends, and Josh and Mum and Dad, and people, Auntie Sue (random); a five-minute summary of the French Revolution. And they all said it was. . . well, really good. And that’s when I came up with the idea.

It’s at least putting to use the PGCE I studied for but was completely wasting.

The first time an actual, believed ‘expense’ is found, Ben should launch into the following:

Thing is, I don’t mind paying tax, incidentally. I’m actually one of those annoying people who believe that you shouldn’t swindle or try to pay less. Maybe it was growing up in the north (well, kind of). Tony Benn was MP for Chesterfield, you know.

Romans, it was the Romans who began the idea of taxation in this country, though I think the Egyptians did something similar before that – see, this is like one of my lessons. They’re normally more interesting than this, I have music and stories. Visual aids.

Pretty much the first well-known story about tax in this country is Lady Godiva, whose husband promised to reduce the levies in Coventry if she promised to ride through the town naked.

Now. I’ve been to Coventry, on a Saturday night as it goes, someone’s birthday, and a lady with no top on wouldn’t raise many eyebrows any more. I can tell you.

Little joke, there.

Seems like we’re at a bit of a junction again, doesn’t it? In the long history of ‘tax’. This country. That’s why I like history, it gives you ‘the long view’.

I don’t know. Just seems like after decades of flipping between one idea and another – one election, Labour, collectivism, chucking in more; next one, Conservative, individualism, chucking in less . . . I guess I naively thought that we’d reached a kind of national consensus. But now it seems like we’re split again, fifty-fifty, and suddenly we’re not just arguing about tax, it’s kind of . . . it’s like what we’re actually arguing about is literally, ‘What do we believe in?’ ‘What are our principles?’ Our ideology, for the way we’re going to live. And tax is just the . . . ‘the case in point’.

I don’t know. I see both sides, probably because of my family. Dad and Granddad, God, couldn’t be more different. Maybe it’s just that generation thing. Granddad, of the war mindset, Atlee and all that, everything nationalised, ‘we’re in this together’ kind of thinking. Lifelong member of the cooperative group. Dad a child of the sixties, I suppose, wanting to keep more money for himself. Secret Tory, though he’d never admit it.

But I see it, of course, I see how low tax can help; help businesses, people, grow and become strong that way, and I should be looking to pay less and fuck ’em (sorry).

But equally, I sometimes wonder whether or not we’d all be happier if we just spent less on drink and clothes and iPods and more on schools and hospitals and police. But I don’t imagine everyone my age shares that view.

‘The Man’. That’s what he’s called, isn’t he? The tax man. You ‘stick it to The Man’. Or ‘The Man’ comes after you. Course, the only contact with ‘The Man’ I have is Lisa.

And she doesn’t sound all that scary. Actually.

Hooray! A proper definite real-life expense! We should have a bell we can ring or something. When we get one. Or not, whatever.

ITUNES RECEIPTS

The first time an iTunes receipt is picked out from the audience, begin with this opening introduction. Then continue as when the specific music downloads are chosen.

Ben OK, iTunes. Erm, well one of the ways I thought about getting through this is to play the songs I bought. Then it makes it feel more like I’m just kicking back, on my bed, listening to some music, instead of, erm . . . calculating what I owe the British government. So.

‘BLACK BEAUTY’ THEME TUNE

Ben Uh, just so you know, right, this was for work, not pleasure. Or some . . . weird, sex game. This was, like, a one-off video where I taught people how to play chess. And this was the knight. Obviously. Because it’s a horse. A black horse, sometimes. And Black Beauty was a black horse. Hence the . . . song . . .

I could listen to this literally all day; it makes me so happy.

Might get it as a ringtone – actually, no, that’d ruin it.

PHILIP GLASS – ‘METAMORPHOSIS TWO’

Ben Uh, yeah, this is Philip Glass. This one was just for me. Actually.

DAVE WILLETS – ‘I AM WHAT I AM’

Ben Um, yeah, teaching chess online. This is the soundtrack I used for the . . . Queen. Which I only realised after might be slightly . . . derogatory but I just thought it fitted, you know. She just, she flounces round the board, can go literally anywhere.

Well. I thought it was funny.

‘THE OFFICE – SERIES TWO’ DVD – 23 OCTOBER 2009

Ben I know what this was. Yeah, look, St Pancras. Something to watch on my laptop, cheer me up on the train to see Josh. This was . . . I dunno, maybe three months after his accident down here. So . . .

I got a train up on the Friday night, which I hated because I hadn’t booked in advance, so I didn’t get a seat and everyone was off home for the weekend so I had to stand, so I couldn’t watch the DVD anyway. And I was rammed in the buffet car, which didn’t open, because the train was too full, and I wanted a drink, which I don’t think was unreasonable given I was on my way to see my brother . . . you know. And I couldn’t even have a little drink, and I remember being disproportionately angry about that.

Had the most ginormous lump in my throat as I walked down the corridor to the ward, just waiting for that moment when I’d see my mum and dad’s faces, and they would both probably first do that ‘smile bravely, happy to see you’ thing, and then do that ‘face slowly crinkle’, erm, thing, and I’d have to try and not cry so that they wouldn’t but just the thought of it was enough to make my bottom lip tremble in that way that it does.

Josh was in his bed. It was dark by then. Jonathan Ross was on the telly.

Friday nights in hospitals are strange. It doesn’t feel like anyone is going to die.

He smiled when I walked in. Said ‘Hey’. But he couldn’t move, hardly at all. By then. His immune system was very weak. There had been . . . complications. He looked . . . a different shape. There were wires.

The last image I have of him as I walked out of the ward was him going, ‘Wait, wait, watch.’ And he managed to creak his thumb up. Just a bit. Which made him laugh. And made me . . .

DRINKS. TOUCAN PUB – 17 SEPTEMBER 2009

Ben Do you know the Toucan pub on . . . (Looking.) What street? It’s just off Soho Square. I didn’t, but it’s famous for Guinness apparently, and I was a little surprised when she – Amy, Oyster Card Girl, met on the tube – when she asked for a pint of Guinness and I was like . . . well, I actually think I laughed, which probably isn’t . . . on a first date, you ask someone their drink and then laugh in their face like they’re an idiot, but I genuinely thought she was joking, she’s like this tiny . . . I doubted she could even hold the glass. Oh God, this is all coming out like I’m some patronising, misogynistic . . . misogynist, but . . .

I remember having not remembered how red her hair was, either, when . . . I’m not saying that, like . . . as in I’ve got anything – in fact I don’t, the opposite, you know the one from Girls Aloud, ginger, I must be the only guy in the world who’d actually quite – anyway. Maybe it’s because on Facebook it had seemed darker in her photos. I’d scrolled through them, obviously – don’t look at me like that, we all do it, you just do, don’t you?

I wasn’t sure it was a date at the time, in fact I’m still not. We’d been messaging each other online and, without blowing my own . . . you know, thing, I think I can occasionally be a little bit funny and charming online, because there’s no eye contact needed and there’s also a delete button. My God I wish I had a delete button in normal life.

You’re all probably wishing I did as well.

So this was actually just a drink, a casual drink, after work. Well, it was casual for her, she just worked round the corner at this, erm, PR, company, place, but, for me it was actually a bit of a schlep, but I still tried to act like I was swinging by. Not like I’d made an effort. Which I had.

I won a bit of money on the Trivial Pursuit machine, which I think impressed her a bit because I answered a question about Tolstoy but to balance it out I also got one right about Wayne Rooney, just so she didn’t think I was a total . . .

So she didn’t think I was me.

She has this brilliant attitude towards everything which I like; which I envy. Just everything is quite amusing or funny to her.

She does this look constantly, especially when I bullshit about something which she won’t let me get away with.

Like this.

Does it.

Not in a ‘you’re a dickhead’ kind of way. Just a kind of . . . sweet way.

And there was obviously something about her that made me feel comfortable because I acted fine all night. I would have actually been quite happy to sit and talk to me, that night. Which is very rarely the case.

She went her way, I went mine, with phone numbers this time. When’s a long enough waiting time before you text? (Never get that right.) That night, morning after, weekend? Dunno. Anyway, we’d stayed out too late and I’d missed the last tube which meant it was a night bus from Trafalgar Square but for the first time ever on a night bus I didn’t mind. In fact I think for the first time ever in the history of anyone on night buses anywhere, I was smiling . . .

CAFFÉ NERO’S – ANY DATE

Ben Right, brilliant, I’m going to ask Lisa about these, because sometimes – does anyone here work from home? Do you know sometimes you literally can’t stay and work in the house any more and you have to get out, well, sometimes the best place to go to is a café and work and you have to buy something if you’re going to sit there so, you know, surely that’s . . . maybe.

Actually, can I tell you something? I’m a little bit proud of this, even though it was a little bit cheeky, but it’s the one and only time I ever stood up against like a corporation or anything, ever. So amongst all these receipts, I kept noticing loads of Caffè Nero ones and you know how they give you that card to stamp? And when you get ten stamps you get a free coffee. Well this one time, at the one on The Cut near Waterloo, I didn’t have my card, so the girl there, quite pretty actually, she said just keep the receipt and we’ll stamp it next time you’re in. And it was like a (angel-like noise) ‘aaarrhhh’, like a ray of light moment, and so I said, can I do that with any receipts I’ve saved, and she said yeah, and so I thought, right. And I went back the next day with a shoe box of about what I think was nearly sixty-four receipts over a period of a year and a half (I drink a lot of coffee), and they argued and cursed a bit but I stood my ground and they gave in and not only that but they got so sick of counting them they just gave me a handful of stamped cards and told me to go away. I’ve still got some left. And sometimes I’ve felt guilty about that, especially as I’m normally so straight down the line about everything, but it wasn’t actually breaking the rules, and I think getting some free coffees from a big corporate chain isn’t quite the same as swindling public services out of less tax. In my head. But my head can be quite strange sometimes.

Inland Revenue There’s a level of allowance you’re allowed when working away from home, but it has to be within reason.

Ben What’s within reason?

Inland Revenue Well it depends on how much you’ve earned. Best advice I can give is just not to take the piss.

Ben Is that the official Treasury line?

Inland Revenue No, that’s mine.

Ben Oh, OK. Do you like coffee? What’s your favourite?

Inland Revenue Cappuccino, normally. Boring, I know.

Ben I’ve never understood cappuccinos, aren’t they just lattes with less in them. Lattes with half of it foam.

Inland Revenue I like the foam bit.

Ben Do you ever buy any muffins or anything? I try not to but –

Inland Revenue No, I’m very good like that. Just a bottle of sparkling water now and again.

Ben Sparkling?! Oh my God, I don’t think I can do this with you, we’re too different.

Inland Revenue (laughing) What?

Ben Cannot stand sparkling, I have a real problem with it. Why is it fizzy? As a general rule, I think, if it doesn’t have any taste, it shouldn’t fizz. It, it’s not right. I have very strong opinions on this.

Inland Revenue Right, well, I’m not changing I’m afraid, so . . .

Ben Would you like a coffee? I’ve got loads of stamped cards – I can post one up if you like. Then it’ll be like I’m taking you out for a coffee. As a . . . you know, thank you. Thing. Only you’ll be drinking it all alone. And I’m not really paying for it, so, actually, it’s a bit rubbish, but, you know.

Inland Revenue Aw, are you sure? Erm. Yeah, OK. That’s very kind, Ben. Thank you.

Ben You’re welcome.

CREAM TEA, PARK LANE HOTEL – 26 SEPTEMBER 2009

Ben Oh, right, OK. Yeah.

Beat. Stares at the ticket for a bit.

Yeah. OK. This was nearly the whole family, actually, down for . . .

Josh felt bad that I was always coming up to Chesterfield to see him, and that he’d never once, even once, been down to London. So last summer they all organised a trip down. They wanted to get there and back in a day. For Josh. He was often relying on a wheelchair by now, but could still stand and walk a little. If he wanted.

Still cooler than me. One of those ‘piss-take’ sense of humours. Can’t open your mouth without him . . . you know . . . picking up on some . . .

But he wanted to use the day and do really, really ‘London’ things. And so cream tea was my idea, showing off, wanted them to think this was what I do every Saturday, huh. Now I’m ‘a Londoner, yah’.

And then the Natural History Museum, too – does anyone . . . ? Are there like tickets for that? Someone’s got? No? Oh, yeah, maybe that’s because it’s free to get in. Idiot. So yeah, that was where we went in the afternoon, Natural History Museum. Of course. It’s what you do, isn’t it.

The reason the fall happened was because . . .

The reason the fall happened was because we were in the Dinosaur Gallery. They have lots of different models and actual fossils of . . . well, I’m sure you’ve all been. Maybe.

I think he was embarrassed about the wheelchair, perhaps because it was London. In Chesterfield he never gave a shit, but maybe something to do with . . . it being this city, he was a bit more self-aware. Wanted to be on his feet as much as possible.

There are some steps leading from the gallery level down to the main hall where the big . . . Is it a brontosaurus or something? The big famous one, anyway.

Massive.

We were waiting for the lift because we didn’t want to take the stairs, the grand, stone steps they have. There was a member of staff there waiting for us. Josh was on his feet; he wanted to get the, like, the panoramic view of the dinosaur, so I took his hand and we wandered to near the top of the steps but leaning on the, erm . . . (what do you) just like the rail thing. But stone. Whatever. To look out across the main hall. Mum and my uncle were talking to the guide. My uncle about the route they got down here on, and the route they were taking back. In the way men do.

I have literally no idea where they came from. The kids. I heard them before I saw them. Three girls. Probably about five or six. They were playing with plastic models of velociraptors.

We turned and had let go of the . . . balustrade? (Is that what’s it’s called?)

The girls had started to fight. Over the models.

They knocked into me first and I kind of . . . stumbled into Josh.

Which made him wobble.

It didn’t look like it was going to be that bad at first, he wasn’t even going down, just shuffling backwards. Trying to correct himself. And I had hold of him still but . . . not quite. It was awkward. And he went over on the first step and I went over with him. I put my hand out so I only slid down a few steps.

I was kind of facing up the stairs at this point so I didn’t see it, but I heard the crack because it was really loud and almost seemed to echo around that big, old hall.

It was his knee, the first break. We later found out.

The way he gathered speed as he rolled down those steps . . .

There’s a part of me still which almost wants to . . . to . . . laugh – it’s OK, I know it’s just that nervousness, you’re allowed to . . . smile, I know what it’s like. The image of someone . . . falling, I know it’s . . . it all seems a little . . .

But it was . . . I’d . . . it’s definitely the most, erm, yeah, horrific thing I’ve ever seen happen to someone I . . . (love) . . .

He was conscious. His eyes were blinking when I reached him. He hadn’t fallen all the way; he’d stopped halfway down. He was looking at me, and I knew he would be OK.

You know, immediately. He’d hurt himself. A lot. Would need a pot. Some crutches. For a while. But I suppose what I mean is . . . it was the look in his eyes, in both our eyes probably, that said . . . what will happen now? Because of his thing. His condition. Over the coming weeks, and months, how much extra . . . bone? Would grow? Now?

Too much?

He just looked. ‘Resigned’. As he lay there. I was . . . ‘frustrated’ doesn’t quite seem the . . .

But just that we’d . . . used up most of his quota, I suppose. In one go.

As the paramedics attended to him I remember looking up at the neck and the head of the brontosaurus. The fossils, the skeleton that had caged something that had died centuries ago. Still here.

OYSTER CARD TOP-UP – 21 AUGUST 2009

Ben I know there’s loads of, erm, Oyster Card top-up receipt things flying around but, uh . . . this is gonna make me sound like a – but I know this one. Because I drew a little star on the back. Just so I’d remember. It was the first time I met Amy. Thursday . . . ? Yeah, Thursday morning. I like Thursday mornings. I think.

I was off to collect some books I ordered at this specialist shop place in Bloomsbury. The girl in front of me touched her card on the reader wrong, or too quickly, or something, so it beeped and the barrier didn’t open, but as I was quick behind her, I put my Oyster Card on the reader, the barriers opened, and not knowing what to do, she walked through on my . . . you know, thing. So that when I touched in again, the barriers didn’t open, it didn’t work. And she turned round, and looked at me.

So she said ‘Oh, sorry.’ In this . . . voice, and offered just to pass me her card over the barrier, because hers hadn’t been read. And so she did, and I scanned hers, walked through the barrier, and gave it her back. Smiling, and saying thanks.

And then we heard the ‘Oy’ from the guy in the booth thing, coming out and saying we can’t do that, lend people our cards and things, and so I tried to explain, but I wasn’t doing it very well, because it was very confrontational and I go all red in those situations and my throat dries. And he actually led us both into the office to take our cards and print out a reading thing to prove that we’d both got enough money and only touched in once each. Just on, you know, on the other person’s card.

And I think because I hadn’t been expecting to talk to a girl so I hadn’t had a chance to get worked up, and because something a bit random had happened so I had a, I had a subject matter to talk about, I think is the reason why I did OK. And why by the time she got off the tube at Tottenham Court Road, she gave me her name to look up on Facebook. Which I did.

‘LES MISÉRABLES’ THEATRE TICKET – 11 DECEMBER 2009

Ben This was when Mum was down, just before Christmas. Present-shopping, even though we all told her not to bother this year because of what had happened, family wise. But she said that would make her feel worse, if she didn’t. Met her . . . yeah, in Covent Garden and she was being quite perky. We had a mulled wine. I remembered thinking that it was good. Remembered thinking why don’t I drink this more; I’d drink it in spring if I could.

I’m not sure she liked the play – well, musical. Wasn’t quite in the frame of . . .

She only picked to see it because of the Susan Boyle song, you know.

I don’t care what people, critics, whoever, always say about everything on television being for the young now – tell you something, X Factor, Britain’s Got Talent, Strictly Dancing in the Jungle with a Celebrity or whatever – my mum and her friends, in their forties and fifties, they are in absolute heaven at the weekend, they bloody love it.

I heard this thing once, someone tell me if this is true, that Ant and Dec, that they’re insured on each other’s life, like for millions, in case the other one dies.

Because they need each other. Like . . . two halves of the same whole.

Always stay on the same side of each other, don’t they. Odd, must be, but not, I suppose, after that length of time. Always to look, to your left, for example, and always have that. . . that other half of you there.

What’s the thing, that other fact, about when you lose a limb – phantom, that’s it. A phantom . . . when you can still feel, literally still feel it, even after it’s . . .

Beat. Then lighter, but forced.

I’m talking about Ant and Dec, ah-ah. Sorry. Instead of. . . (what?) – Mum! Christmas. There we go.

We got a bit too drunk, back at mine. That night. It was strange just sat in my flat with just my mum, just having some drinks. It opened her up a bit. Which meant she got quite emotional. And then very emotional. And then pretty hysterical, actually. And . . . and I was absolutely rubbish at saying the right thing. Only I’ve never seen anyone so completely and utterly broken before. So that’s my excuse.

She talked about going to see someone. To talk to. Professionally. My uncle’s suggestion. I was surprised. Always thought of all that as being a bit. . . middle class. Bit southern. And she was the opposite, on both counts. From where you just deal with it. Yourself. Anything else is just. . . indulgence.

She wondered if I’d ever thought about it. And to my surprise, I did. Half-heartedly.

Kept asking why I didn’t come up to visit more, and I lied and said work, and lied and said I would try to more and I know all of this is so completely selfish; I should be going up there, I should be up there, given that I could do my job most places, but the thought of being there, of being in that room, of living in the shadow of that crooked, fucking, church spire all the time . . .

And so I don’t. And I’m leaving them to get on with it without me. Because down here I can forget. And I do know that’s awful, so you don’t need to . . . look at me like . . .

SOFA CUSHIONS, DEBENHAMS – 28 APRIL 2009

Ben Oh. This was, erm . . . for Sam and Luke’s wedding. Civil partnership. Off one of those gift lists they send out. It was in Worcester, the ceremony. They’re Rachel’s – my, erm, ex – they’re her friends really, but I got to know them quite well. Especially Luke, he was a teacher too. Not the best day. We’d already had our little chat about . . . not being, erm, being certain about what we were doing. Nothing like going to a wedding when you’re in doubt about your own, uh . . . about where you are going. I don’t mean to the wedding, we both knew we were going to Worcester. Even though I actually didn’t know where Worcester was, I thought it was in, like, Devon. But anyway . . .

First gay wedding I’d been to. It was pretty cool. Really cool, actually.

Lady Gaga, if you’re interested, the first dance. Hardly a slow, rocking from side to side ballad, but there you go. Reminded me of my mum and dad. Actually.

Not because I was there for their first dance, obviously not, I mean it just reminded me of them. My dad hates any kind of . . . public display of. . . and, as ‘the legend’ goes – and by that I mean my mum and her sisters every time they get together – he could only stand being up there on the dance floor with my mum for about thirty seconds and then had to duck out. ‘A Whiter Shade of Pale’.

That was probably already the beginning of the end. For them two. If you plotted things back. It probably started there.

I got very drunk. Must have been lying on the grass outside the tent at some point. Had mud stains on my knees. I was probably being sick.

STREET VAN – 5 JUNE 2009

Ben Oh yeah. Moving house. Flat. Slightly depressing, not gonna lie. I loved my old house. Cavendish Road.

June, yeah, so my ‘business’ wasn’t a business properly by this point, and we were still, like, half a year until Granddad’s money came through so it was a case of accepting I couldn’t afford to live on my own, after Sal and Casey and her dickhead boyfriend had moved out, so . . .

First moved down here, London I mean, in God, well, four, five years ago, whenever that was. Found myself in Tooting, don’t know why, but a lot of people seem to, somehow. Should be something on the sign, Tooting, as you arrive. Like . . . ‘Sorry. But, let’s all just try and make the best of it, yeah?’

So, but, every year since then, though, literally once a year, I’ve moved one stop further up the Line, as my circumstances improved. First from Tooting Broadway to Tooting Bec, then Balham, then Clapham South, where I was last year. I calculated that, all being well, at that rate, I’d have a riverside apartment by 2016.

But as circumstances changed, back I go – yeah, actually, like snakes and ladders, I’m on a snake now see, back to Balham. I’m like some sort of economic barometer all on my own, actually, me. Sod the FTSE 100, just look how high or low I am on the Northern Line to test the economic strength of the what’s-it. Country. ‘And today in the markets, Ben dropped three stops down to Colliers Wood.’

Morden almost certainly representing some kind of worldwide financial collapse. End of the line? Too bloody right, have you been? Jesus.

So yeah, now, at this rate, I’m gonna have to wait for global warming to bring the river to my apartment, huh. Actually no, shouldn’t joke, environmental issues; don’t really want South London to become submerged under water, obviously.

Maybe Elephant and Castle.

I’m being slightly optimistic when I say I’m back in ‘Balham’, though, if I’m honest; Elmbourne Road is more Tooting Bec. Nice location, to be fair, right on the Common. And I can see Balham from where I am, so, technically . . .

Balham’s one of those places that’s labelled as ‘up and coming’. Permanently, as far as I can tell. I was in its ‘library’ once when –

Sorry, why did I use air quotes then? Like it’s some hypothetical book depository; what a git, it’s perfectly nice, a perfectly good . . . (Tuts.) Such a snob sometimes, hate that about . . .

Anyway, it’s a perfectly good ‘library’ – oh my God, see, can’t stop doing it now, fuck it – ‘library’, I was in, one time, saw an old magazine from like the mid-eighties, and even back then it labelled Balham as ‘up and coming’, so I’m guessing it’s just one of those places which is always coming but never actually comes.

There’s an innuendo there somehow, but that’s not really me, I’d blush, so have a moment just to make up your own, maybe. It’d be funnier than mine anyway.

BOTTLE OF PORT – 14 OCTOBER 2009

Ben Oh my God. OK. Erm. Huh, this one makes me smile, actually. Which is odd because it’s kind of about my Granddad. When he was dying, he decided to rejig his thing, his will. We didn’t know this at the time. He was quite old school and, for whatever reason, he decided that Josh and I wouldn’t get our inheritance until we were older, more mature, when we needed it more, or something. We’re not talking estates and heirlooms, but. . . ‘some’.

I have my own theory. About Josh. My granddad giving him something to . . . aim for. Maybe. But . . .

Anyway, he did it for ten years after the date he changed it, making us twenty-seven. Died about a month or so after. So we should have got it in October ’08, which was . . . (Sigh.) This makes me sound like a . . . but that was one of the reasons I thought I could quit my job and start the website business. With this capital. Anyway, turns out no, some legal mumbo jumbo, the difference between ‘in the tenth year’ and ‘in ten years’ or something meant apparently it wasn’t until last October, ’09, despite the fact I’d handed my notice in at the council the year before. Hence why I was, erm . . . a bit poorer than I had thought I was going to be. Serves me right. Relying on ‘inherited wealth’. Everything my granddad was against. Maybe that’s why he did it.

It took me a while to understand why there was so much. When I got the cheque. Wondered why it was . . . double. What he’d said it would be.

And then I remembered.

It was Graham’s vintage port, one of his favourites. So I had a little glass in his honour, the day it came in. To say thanks. His life spent working.

Nice, too.

RETURN TRAIN TICKET, LONDON TO CHESTERFIELD – 31 OCTOBER 2009

Ben Oh, this was erm . . . funeral. Back home.

I know people always say there were loads of people there but there were loads of people there. My granddad’s funeral was . . . not really very full. Tragic, I suppose really, the longer you live, the less people are around to come to your funeral. Josh was only twenty-seven, so . . . I guess those are often quite well attended.

Close to the entrance of the . . . I’m sorry, I’m literally no good with, erm . . . ‘ecclesiastical’ terminology – apart from that – chapel, church? Chapel? Close to the way in, anyway, is the children’s part of the cemetery, and you can tell what it is because it’s so colourful. They have toys and balloons and . . . I think they put it there to try and get you going before you walk in, deliberately. Like the opposite to a warm-up act before a show, but the same principal. Loosen you up. Remember while I was waiting to go in, this man was draping a blue Chelsea top over a little headstone in there.

Mum and Dad have never said that they . . . held any . . . towards me. About the accident that happened. Which doesn’t mean that I don’t but . . .

I guess it’s just the idea of coming from the exact same egg. But being given two completely different chances in life. And one of us made the absolute most of the lack of chance he had. And the other has been wasting the amount he’s been given.

I thought I would be a mess but I think I only cry when other people cry and for whatever reason, Mum next to me was being really . . .

I could hear people behind me blubbering from the word go – and that’s fine. Of course that’s fine. I think sometimes, though, it’s the occasion, the idea, that actually makes people sad. Like watching a sad film. You’re not really heartbroken at a film, are you? You don’t . . . feel it. You’re not . . . ‘grieving’.

I only nearly went when the Jacko song came on, when the curtain closed around the . . . (coffin) and I’d remembered hearing it being talked about before but it was only when it actually came on did I think it was a bad idea. Because it made it all about me. Because it was my name. The song. And I hated that because then I felt it looked like I was trying to steal the . . . or something.

I didn’t like the way people were looking judgementally at Dad. For leaving. Earlier in the year. It had been mutual, him and Mum. Josh had said it was all right, more than that, he’d practically bloody asked them to . . . because he knew they’d been staying together for him. Just waiting for him to . . .

Maybe I was imagining it, maybe no one was looking. He didn’t stay for the thing after though. I watched him walk off towards his car. So slowly. His hands in his trouser pockets.

I have tried to like that song . . . tried. Always. When Josh would sing it at me, jokily, sometimes deliberately trying to wind me up. But I just, I can’t. So sentimental. So . . .

I don’t know.

I just kept my head down, staring at my trousers. There was still that mud stain showing, despite the fact I got my suit dry-cleaned. Couldn’t remember where that had come from . . .

‘UP’ CINEMA TICKET – 12 OCTOBER 2009

Ben Went to the IMAX to watch this with Amy. Oyster Card girl. Technically I suppose it was our first date because I’ve no idea whether the drinks in Soho was a date or just a . . . a pre-date. Anyway, I can’t say date without cringing, it’s so . . . High School Musical.

And I didn’t want to come across like a complete, socially inept prude. So I remember deciding to inch my hand over hers at some point during the film. Which meant I couldn’t enjoy the first hour and a half of the film. Unluckily I’d finally plucked up the courage to do it at the moment something 3D flew out of the screen. So Amy put her hand to her mouth in shock just as I . . . (Demonstrates.)

So then I kind of had to pretend I’d gone a very long way round to do the same.

Which she didn’t buy because she turned and smiled at me, and she took hold of my hand and put it on her lap so that was fine.

They’re expensive, aren’t they? Relationships. You ‘do’ things. Meals. Films. Plays. Peddle-boats. Mind you, Amy insists on paying half of everything, not like Rachel, I’d pay for the meals then – odd, isn’t it? Still. Or maybe not. Dunno. She’d happily let me pay the bill but had a go that time I held the door open for her. So there you are, I obviously don’t know the rules. Maybe no one does.

She joked towards the end that I had more moisturising creams and face washes and stuff than she had. I didn’t want to get them, they were bought for me, and every other guy I knew had started . . . you know.

They want you to still be a ‘bloke’ bloke a lot of the time, but also have feelings and nice skin. It’s a fine line, and I’m not sure I’m treading it. I dunno.

I took Amy out for our first meal though – does anyone have it? It was Bluebird, on Kings Road. No?

Paid for that. It felt right, doing that. As The Man. I know, how ‘un-modern’, but . . . I dunno. Deep down I still think it’s expected. Wanted. Almost. By both sides. Some of the old ways. Simpler ways.

I dunno.

That bus journey back to my house that night – not this one, the Bluebird one. The 319 through Clapham Junction, that was. . . that was bad. Top deck (why did we sit on the top deck? Idiot.) Some lads behind us making comments about Amy.

What they’d like to do to her.

I was completely and utterly paralysed, I did nothing. She would have stopped me from saying or doing anything I’m sure, because I would have probably died, but the fact is I didn’t say or do anything, I just did nothing, because I didn’t know what to do.

We never spoke about it after. But I think I must have disappointed her. In a way.

That was maybe going to be the first time we . . . you know. Properly ‘spent’ the night together.

We just went to sleep instead.

This exchange between Ben and the Inland Revenue should be added in by the actor at a convenient point around halfway through the play.

Ben Lisa, I’ve got receipts which are, erm, dated from before the actual tax year starts in April, but if they’re business expenses can I still –

Inland Revenue Yes, you are allowed a certain amount of set-up costs which can be spread forward to this year. So. Anything else? How’s it all going, all right?

Ben Erm. Erm. Yeah. I guess, it . . . it’s going. So.

Inland Revenue Well, I don’t envy you.

Ben Have you ever had to do one?

Inland Revenue No, never. Ironically enough. Always been PAYE for me.

Ben Have you always worked at the Inland Revenue?

Inland Revenue No. Although it feels like it. It’s a good job, though, nice people. Close to where I live.

Ben Do you like Wrexham?

Inland Revenue I don’t dislike it. All my family are here. It’s not quite London, but. . .

Ben Huh. Well. London’s not quite London. In a way.

Inland Revenue How do you mean?

Ben I don’t know. I mean. I don’t know. The idea of what living here is like is . . . it’s different to . . . I mean, it’s amazing now, when I speak to family, or friends back home, the mere mention of living in London still provokes this . . . ‘Ooh, London, eh? Wow, look at you.’

I can’t do anything now, like put a sugar in my tea or check my phone without Mum going, ‘Ooh, you and your London ways.’ I think she thinks I spend every evening at launch parties and galas or something.

Inland Revenue (laughs) Aw, she’s probably just proud of you.

Ben (beat) All I knew of London was Richard Curtis films and Bridget Jones. I had visions of what it’d be like before I came here. To study. Walking over the Thames to get to work in the morning, didn’t matter where I worked, I assumed you had to walk over the Thames to get there. Evening drinks in wine bars with my friends, surrounded by the city lights, bemoaning our current ‘relationships’, providing support, hailing cabs, dashing to meet other friends at the theatre, going to the opening nights of exhibitions, somehow, didn’t matter, just assumed somehow I would. Saturday afternoons having picnics in royal parks and Sunday afternoons reading a classic novel in a little café by the river.

But I don’t. I don’t make lots of cool meals that I find in newspapers and magazines. I don’t have a fully stocked pantry of ingredients that I picked up from the market at the weekend, I just stop by Sainsbury’s every night and buy ‘a meal’, and eat that meal, that night, in front of the telly. And if I go out with friends it’s the same old pubs that we know and I’ve never even been to a couple of the parks, ever, and if I do read a book it’s on the tube and that’s only if I’m awake enough not to fall asleep.

Because I guess somewhere none of us think of this as being our life, this is just a gap, a temporary delay in the service, before we start properly. Or something. But then suddenly you realise that it has started. And this is it.

(Looking at his receipt.) If these are it. If this is everything I’ve experienced and done for a year.

Then . . .

Inland Revenue . . . Ben?

MORE ITUNES RECEIPTS

LION KING SOUNDTRACK – ‘I JUST CAN’T WAIT TO BE KING’

Ben OK, again, don’t judge, this is another teaching chess soundtrack, online. For the King obviously. ‘Everywhere you look I’m standing in the spotlight.’ Yeah? No?

Rowan Atkinson.

I think I kind of associate with, erm, the King. On the chess board. Which probably sounds quite narcissistic. But it’s, actually, when you think about it, he’s like one of the weakest . . . you know, and he has everyone huddled around him, to protect him. Because they’re all willing to sacrifice for him, because they’re strong and they can swoosh around, and all he can do is, is move . . . you know, one little step. At a time.

‘LES MISERABLES’ (ORIGINAL SOUNDTRACK) – ‘I DREAMED A DREAM’

Ben Oh. Les Mis. It’s the one Mum likes, so I got it for her.

MICHAEL JACKSON – ‘BEN’

Ben just stands and listens to this one for a while. . .

PROCOL HARUM – ‘A WHITER SHADE OF PALE’

Ben just stands and listens to this one for a while. . .

THE TANGO PROJECT –‘POR UNA CABEZA’

Ben Oh. I got this in preparation. For my dance class. Basically you do this like induction thing over the first month where Rea at the Leisure Centre place introduces you to all the dances she can do, like jive and, erm . . . ballroom and lots of others. And then from then on you pick one and specialise.

I wasn’t really finding, erm . . . None of them really grabbed me.

I was doing it to get over it. To get over that fear of. . . having spent virtually all of my childhood not running or not jumping and certainly not dancing for fear of . . .

But then Rea started showing me this, erm . . . well, they’re called ‘non-contact’ dances, all from like the fifties and sixties, things like the twist and what have you, where you don’t have to touch anyone or bounce into anyone and there’s no risk of, erm . . .

(Deep breath.) So. Erm. I’m happy to, uh . . . you know. In the spirit of – I’m happy to maybe show you a couple. If you’d like. Or not. I don’t mind.

Yes? Erm. OK. Well.

Turns ‘Por Una Cabeza’ off and replaces it with The Water Boys, ‘The Whole of The Moon’.

Something more upbeat. OK. Just a couple. This . . . is the Hitch Hike. (Demonstrates.) Thumb up, one-two-three to the side, like that. Yes?

Erm. This is the Pony. (Demonstrates.) Jump to the right, this foot, jump to the left, up, and so on.

And erm . . . OK, this is Watusi. (Demonstrates.) All in the hips. There. That’s it. Done.

This exchange between Ben and the Inland Revenue should be added in by the actor at a convenient point close to the end of the play when nearly all receipts have been taken from the audience.

Ben Oh, hello, sorry, I, I asked to be put through to Lisa.

Inland Revenue Ah, I’m afraid Lisa’s not around today, can I help at all?

Ben Not around? What do you mean, not at work? What’s the problem?

Inland Revenue Is this a personal call, sorry?

Ben No, I just, I want to know where she is, what’s wrong with her.

Inland Revenue I think she just called in sick. I can pass on a message, if that’s –?

Ben No, I . . . it – I wanted to ask her about dance classes.

Inland Revenue Dance classes?

Ben I’m taking dance classes.

Inland Revenue (pause) Right.

Ben I want to know if I should put the dance classes in as expenses, because even though I’m using them a little bit for personal reasons I think they might also be useful for my online video things.

Inland Revenue Well, I’d need to know a little bit more about the nature of your business if I were to / advise on –

Ben Lisa knows the nature of my business, I don’t understand. What’s – how . . . When will she be back?

Inland Revenue Well, I don’t think we’re expecting her in for the rest of the week.

Ben For the re – . . . A whole week?! (Tries to calm down.) Can I have her home number please? I’m not weird, I promise.

Inland Revenue Sir, any enquiries you have, I will be able to help with.

Ben No, I can’t talk to you!

Inland Revenue Why not?

Ben Because you’re not her . . .

Inland Revenue Sorry –?

Ben Because you’re not . . . ! I will leave a message, can you get her to call me when she’s back.

Inland Revenue Of course, what’s your number?

Ben She has it.

Inland Revenue And your name.

Ben Ben.

Inland Revenue Ben what?

Ben She’ll know. She’ll . . .

Inland Revenue I’m sorry, but we do have a lot of people calling –

Ben She’ll know, all right?! Fuck. She’ll . . . She’ll know.

TEDDY BEAR, HAMLEYS – 14 FEBRUARY 2010

Ben This was when Casey had her baby. Jack (great name). Casey who I lived with on Cavendish Road. Her, me and Salim. We’d all done our PGCE together. Sal was the first to go, he fell in love, in fact the story of that house is basically people falling in love and leaving, one by one, until it was just me, ha ha. Erm. Yeah, Sal went to his girlfriend’s, now wife, so Casey moved the dickhead in with us, made worse by him being around so much. About a year or so ago he found a black hair in a Ferrero Rocher and this somehow got him a lot of money and so he just mooched around the house all day, pissing me off. And then eventually they moved out together.

Bit of a wake-up call. Going to Casey’s. Very strange and . . . yeah, slightly disconcerting, seeing people you grew up with, studied with, the same age as you, all starting to reproduce. Sal was there with his baby girl, too. She was like walking and talking and everything. I’d seen her a year ago, she could barely hold up her head, now she’s learnt a whole new language and motor skills. All in one year. What have . . . what have I done in that . . .

Never held a baby before. Casey held it out to me and I nearly picked it up by the head, like that, one hand; I mean what do you do, where do you learn that?

Where’s the helpline for that? For all these . . . for becoming a . . .

STUDIO 6 RESTAURANT – 17 DECEMBER 2009

Ben Oh yeah. I don’t know if you know it, little place on the South Bank. Quite nice.

I knew what she was going to say. Amy. Oyster Card Girl. I’d been such a . . . an absolute miserable . . . erm, what am I trying to say – I knew what I was doing to her. Taking it out on her, everything that was happening at home. You have to be brave in front of colleagues and associates and friends, don’t you, but you can be as big a wreck as you want in front of your girlfriend. And so . . . I was.

She hadn’t been able to get to the funeral; maybe that was it. She had a work thing, a launch thing, in . . . . Oh, I don’t – somewhere in Germany. Hamburg maybe. And even though I pretended that was fine, I held it against her for the rest of our . . . erm, our time. I think.

She basically couldn’t carry on the way things were. But at the time I was still so upset and angry and didn’t really intend to change that any time soon, so . . .

Took a walk along the South Bank. Which was nice. I remember it being quite chilly – what month was it again?

As we started getting closer to London Bridge tube, I started to get a real sense of time running out, to change her mind, or add in a caveat to our agreement that meant if I did change, get better, happier, maybe we could see where we were, maybe after Christmas. She smiled, and said maybe, but I knew that meant no. I gave it a fortnight before she started to notice the looks and the glances of other boys, the ones she hadn’t been looking for when she was with me.

I will miss her. I will miss how she wouldn’t laugh for a while and then explode with laughter all in one go, like the time my phone rang and I answered the TV remote. I’ll even miss how irrationally angry she could get, like at not being able to light her lighter, or not being able to fold newspapers, like the time she got so mad at the Sunday Times she went outside into the garden and set it on fire.

I’m so stupid.

I’m so stupid, why can’t I keep hold of the things that make me . . . fucking . . . smile?

Inland Revenue Hello, Lisa speaking.

Ben Where were you yesterday?

Inland Revenue Ben?

Ben You weren’t there, where were you?

Inland Revenue I was off ill.

Ben What was wrong with you?

Inland Revenue Ben, I don’t think that’s / fair –

Ben I needed you.

Inland Revenue What for?

Ben Dance lessons.

Inland Revenue What?

Ben Dance lessons, I want to know whether I should put down my dance lessons.

Inland Revenue Oh. Sorry. I thought you were asking me to come to dance lessons.

Ben . . . But you live in Wrexham.

Inland Revenue Yes, I know that. What are the dance lessons for?

Ben I thought I might incorporate some dance into the videos.

Inland Revenue Sounds like a good idea.

Ben But I think that might be a bit of a lie, so I just wanted to check. I think I might just be wanting to do them because I’ve never really danced before. Because as a child I thought I might hurt myself if I did. But then when I realised I wouldn’t hurt myself I still didn’t do it. Even though Josh did; he danced all the time and sometimes he’d ask me to dance, in our room, just run around dancing to Michael Jackson and I never would, no matter how often he asked me, I never would. How stupid is that?

Inland Revenue I don’t think that sounds stupid.

Ben I mean, what kind of arsehole, am I? Too afraid to dance with my own brother.

I don’t think I can do this. Every year.

Inland Revenue What do you mean?

Ben I don’t think I can have this, this reliving thing, this ‘marker’, every year. That can’t be a way to live your life, to be forced, every twelve months, to look back at all the things you did wrong, at all the people you did bad things to. I think I’ll just end up never leaving the house to avoid doing anything that will make me sad when it comes to this.

I don’t want to be sad any more, Lisa. I’d rather just give you too much money. And not have to do this.

Inland Revenue Ben, that would be a first.

Ben . . . Huh. (Smiles a little.) It won’t even be that much. I only earned about six.

Inland Revenue Six? Six what?

Ben Grand. Thousand.

Inland Revenue You only earned six grand last year?

Ben Yeah, all right.

Inland Revenue No I’m not saying it because . . . I’m saying you have a six and half thousand pound allowance.

Ben What’s that?

Inland Revenue When you’re self-employed you’re allowed to earn up to £6,500 before we start taxing you.

Ben . . . Six and a ha – So I don’t need to pay any tax?

Inland Revenue Not this year, no.

Ben (beat) So this whole thing has been a complete waste of time?!

Inland Revenue I don’t know. What do you think?

Ben thinks.

Inland Revenue How did you live on six grand for a year?

Ben My . . . I had some, erm . . . inheritance. That I . . . And my mum and dad, they, erm . . .

Inland Revenue Wow. You owe them a big thank you.

Ben Yeah. Yeah, I guess I should go and. See them.

Inland Revenue Well. Anyway. It was nice to chat to you these past weeks. For what it was worth.

Ben Thank you.

Inland Revenue Maybe you should think about getting an accountant next year. Then you won’t have to go through all this again, will you?

Ben (beat) No, I think . . . I think maybe I’ll, I’ll keep, I’ll do it, I’ll give it another . . . It, it’s probably – I think it’s probably something I should. Erm. Do.

Inland Revenue Well. If you’re ever in the Wrexham area. . . could always pop in, eh?

Ben Huh. Yeah. (Beat.) I never will be, though.

Inland Revenue (laughs) No. Why would you be? Keep up with your dance lessons, though, won’t you?

Ben Yeah. All right.

Music fades in.

Lights down.





Chronology


2005

Albert’s Boy (Finborough Theatre, London: recipient of a Pearson Playwriting Bursary)



2006

Eden’s Empire (Catherine Johnson Award for Best Play)





Little Madam (Finborough Theatre, London)



2008

Tory Boyz (Soho Theatre)





Sons of York (Finborough Theatre, London)



2009

A History of Falling Things (Clwyd Theatr Cymru, Wales)



2010

The Whisky Taster (Bush Theatre, London)





The Man (Finborough Theatre, London)





Huck (Chipping Norton Theatre and national tour)





Relish (National Youth Theatre)



2011

The Tour Guide (Edinburgh Festival Fringe)





Bassett (National Theatre Connections)



2012

This House (Cottesloe, National Theatre, London)





By the Same Author


A History of Falling Things

Albert’s Boy

Bassett

in National Theatre Connections 2011

Eden’s Empire

This House

The Man

Tory Boyz

in Producers’ Choice: Six Plays for Young Performers

The Whisky Taster





METHUEN DRAMA CONTEMPORARY DRAMATISTS

This collection first published in Great Britain in 2012 by Methuen Drama

Methuen Drama, an imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc

Methuen Drama

Bloomsbury Publishing Plc

50 Bedford Square, London WC1B 3DP

www.methuendrama.com

Tory Boyz first published by Methuen Drama 2010

in Producers’ Choice: Six Plays for Young Performers

Copyright © 2010, 2012 James Graham

Sons of York first published by Methuen Drama 2012

Copyright © 2012 James Graham

A History of Falling Things first published by Methuen Drama 2009

Copyright © 2009, 2012 James Graham

The Whisky Taster first published by Methuen Drama 2010

Copyright © 2010, 2012 James Graham

The Man first published by Methuen Drama 2010

Copyright © 2010, 2012 James Graham

Introduction copyright © James Graham 2012

James Graham has asserted his rights under the Copyright, Designs

and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as the author of these works

ISBN 978 1 4081 8386 1

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Available in the USA from Bloomsbury Academic & Professional,

175 Fifth Avenue/3rd Floor, New York, NY 10010

Caution

All rights whatsoever in this play are strictly reserved and application for performance etc. should be made before rehearsals begin by professionals to Curtis Brown Group Limited, Haymarket House, 28–29 Haymarket, London SW1Y 4SP and by amateurs to Methuen Drama Performance Rights, 50 Bedford Square, London WC1B 3DP.

No performance may be given unless a licence has been obtained.

No rights in incidental music or songs contained in the work are hereby granted and performance rights for any performance/presentation whatsoever must be obtained from the respective copyright owners.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means – graphic, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping or information storage and retrieval systems – without the written permission of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.

Sign up for newsletters to be the first to hear about our latest releases and special offers





