James Graham

Plays: 2

This House: ‘It recreates, with startling vividness, the madness of life in the Westminster village during five action-filled years . . . Above all, the play unlocks a whole era.’

Guardian

The Angry Brigade: ‘Graham is a funny writer on serious topics, and the script has his usual mix of ambition and levity. There’s a thriller-ish hunt for the criminals in the first half, while the second gallops through direct action, pop-culture parodies, political theory and messy relationships. Small personal moments manage to be both bathetic and heart-wrenching.’ Independent

The Vote: Graham . . . not only catches an entertaining sense of the here and now . . . but more poignantly evokes the tide of history that turns us all, if we act on our prerogative, into bit-players in an epic drama.’

Daily Telegraph

Monster Raving Loony: ‘James Graham’s plays mine political history in order to comment on the current state of the nation . . . [But] instead of straight biography, we get a bonkers essay in nostalgia . . . This is an intriguing look at the mechanisms of democracy . . . It’s packed with smart ideas about the theatricality of politics and makes an attractive case for Sutch’s enduring significance.’

Evening Standard

James Graham won the Catherine Johnson Award for the Best Play 2007 for Eden’s Empire. His previous plays include Albert’s Boy (recipient of a Pearson Playwriting Bursary), Little Madam (Finborough), Tory Boyz (Soho Theatre), A History of Falling Things (Clwyd Theatr Cymru), The Man (Finborough), The Whisky Taster (Bush), Sons of York (Finborough), Bassett (National Theatre Connections), This House (National Theatre), which won Best Play at the Evening Standard Awards, The Angry Brigade (Paines Plough/Theatre Royal Plymouth), The Vote (Donmar Warehouse) and Monster Raving Loony (Theatre Royal Plymouth/Soho Theatre). Other work includes Finding Neverland – a musical with music and lyrics by Gary Barlow, Coalition for Channel 4 and the screenplay for the film x + y.





Contents

Select Chronology

Introduction

THIS HOUSE

THE ANGRY BRIGADE

THE VOTE

MONSTER RAVING LOONY





By the same author

Albert’s Boy

The Angry Brigade

Bassett (in National Theatre Connections 2011)

Eden’s Empire

A History of Falling Things

This House

The Man

Tory Boyz

The Whisky Taster

Graham Plays: 1

(A History of Falling Things, Tory Boyz, The Man, The Whisky Taster, Sons of York)





James Graham Chronology

2005 Albert’s Boy (Finborough Theatre, London: recipient of a Pearson Playwriting Bursary)

2006 Eden’s Empire (Catherine Johnson Award for Best Play)

2007 Little Madam (Finborough Theatre, London)

2008 Tory Boyz (Soho Theatre)

Sons of York (Finborough Theatre, London)

2009 A History of Falling Things (Clwyd Theatr Cymrum, Wales)

2010 The Whisky Taster (Bush Theatre, London)

The Man (Finborough Theatre, London)

Huck (Chipping Norton Theatre and national tour)

Relish (National Youth Theatre)

2011 The Tour Guide (Edinburgh Fringe Festival)

Bassett (National Theatre Connections)

2012 This House (Cottesloe, National Theatre, London: Evening Standard Award for Best Play)

2014 The Angry Brigade (Theatre Royal Plymouth/ Paines Plough)

2015 The Vote created with Josie Rourke (Donmar Warehouse)

2016 Monster Raving Loony (Theatre Royal Plymouth/ Soho Theatre)





Introduction

Prior to writing This House for the National Theatre in 2012, I’d spent five revelatory years at the little Finborough in Earl’s Court, London, writing overly large and populated plays for that tiny room above a pub. There was a play about the 1950s Suez Canal Crisis, one set during the 1970s Winter of Discontent, one about a 12-year-old Margaret Thatcher going on an adventure with imaginary friends.

As a twenty-something wannabe writer I’m sure I didn’t deliberately set out to write historical plays, believing probably that’s what ‘grown-up’ playwrights did, once you’d earned your stripes. It just so happened that the researching of one event would normally throw up another story I thought was cool. Cool to me, anyway. And that would become the next idea.

This was the roll-up-your-sleeves world of fringe theatre where the bigger the play you wrote, the more work you had to do to raise money yourself, source props and costumes, build and paint the sets, and sell tickets. And it was during the research for the Thatcher show, Little Madam, that I first heard a story that moved, surprised and horrified me.

#spoileralert – if you don’t want the intricacies of 1970s parliament unveiled here then maybe read the play first.

How did Margaret Thatcher get into power in 1979 and change the course of our national history? The election, yes, but why was the election called? A Vote of No Confidence in James Callaghan’s Labour administration. But what’s that? (This is me skipping from book to book, by the way, slightly before the days when you’d have easy access to the internet at home and Wikipedia was properly a thing. Imagine?)

A Vote of No Confidence is Parliament’s way of forcing a government out of office if over half of the House want you gone. The opposition called one in March 1979, and Labour lost. They had to go to the polls in forced and unfavourable circumstances, and 18 years of Conservative power ensued.

I knew most of that. I didn’t know the Commons vote that changed history was won by only one. One single MP’s vote, out of over six hundred cast. Surely it wasn’t possible, I thought, for there to be a story surrounding where that ‘one’ missing vote came from . . .?

Doctor Alfred Broughton, the Member for Batley and Morley, and his absence from Parliament due to illness – that one Labour vote the government needed to survive – first inspired a radio play; How You Feeling, Alf? (I know, a very whimsical radio-drama-like title). But the more I learned about the lead up to that incredible night of No Confidence, often dubbed one of the most dramatic nights in the House of Commons history by those who chart such things, the more I couldn’t believe what I found. A hung parliament where chaos ensued, actual blood was split, and an ancient system came under its greatest strain; the closest it has ever come to collapse.

When the first hung parliament since that one arrived in May 2010, and the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition became a new and bizarre reality, it gave me the impetus to knock on the door of the National Theatre and just ‘see’. I had imagined in the weeks that followed the election there might be a line of national treasures lining up outside Nicholas Hytner’s office with way more experience than me, pitching their own response to events, and I consequently felt not a little presumptuous doing so. I was underestimating the openness, kindness, patience and thirst for a risk by Nick, the literary manager Sebastian Born, and his associate Ben Power in being willing to give me a shot.

The problem was it started off being impossible to research this play.

I knew I wanted it to be set in the offices of the whips. I had no desire to portray the view of the leaders at the top, I wanted the dirty, mucky, grubby world of those turning the wheels in the engine room. But parliamentary whips have a code of conduct whereby they reveal nothing, publish nothing, give no interviews, take their secrets – and they are the ones with Parliament’s secrets – with them to their graves.

When Gyles Brandreth famously broke ranks and published a book, Breaking the Code, shining a light on some of the dark goings on amongst the whips in the 1990s, he received a note on the day of publication that contained only a ‘black spot’ on a card – a symbol that he had betrayed an ancient tradition, and was banished.

Some facts, anecdotes and stories could be pieced together through archives – Jack Weatherill’s collection of scribbles and notes held in a dusty room in Canterbury (including a particularly revelatory bit of arithmetic jotted down hastily on the night of the confidence vote) – though nothing beats face-to-face interviews.

Possibly because time had passed since the 1974–79 parliament, as had many of the characters responsible, there was a gradual relaxation towards me following an infinite amount of letter writing and phone calling. Joe Ashton, the former Labour MP for Bassetlaw and author of his own inspired-by-whips office play, was one of the first to invite me up to his Sheffield home.This led on to lunch with Bruce Grocott, formerly the member for Lichfield and Tamworth in Portcullis House. Which then followed an accidental passing in the corridor of the inimitable Ann Taylor, formerly of Bolton West who was to become one of the most important contributors to the show. Sir George Young, in the 70s a young junior Tory whip – Leader of the Commons when I met him. None of this was through anything other than just asking, and then asking those I asked to ask more people to help me. And I’m very grateful.

All of which led me to the living room in Wakefield of Walter Harrison – the most formidable Westminster figure that you’ve probably never heard of, but a legend in the corridors of power. Believed to be the most intimidating whip ever to have occupied the role, Tony Blair once confirmed that Harrison was the only man he’d ever been afraid of, and sat opposite him even in his 90s I can see why. But there was a mischievous sparkle and unmistakable warmth to him that vitally informed the role I wrote for him.

In an increasingly polarized, angry and polemical political climate defined by its disunity and factionalism, both here and across the world, his deep and complicated friendship with Jack Weatherill, his Tory counterpart, which – following that fateful night of the confidence vote that the whole play leads up to – lasted long into retirement, deeply affected me, and grew to become something of the spine of the show.

I don’t think you’re ever particularly conscious of trends growing in your plays as you go along, but both This House and The Vote bear out, I suppose, my geeky interest in processes – how things happen. Leaving the audience to answer the ‘why’.

The 2015 general election that followed the hung outcome in 2010 was unique in that, following the Fixed Term Parliament Act, it was possible for the first time ever to know years in advance the exact date of the polling day, rather than it being the prerogative and the whim of the sitting Prime Minister. Which meant, uniquely, it was possible to plan in advance for something that night . . .

I was rehearsing a show about surveillance called Privacy with Josie Rourke at the Donmar Warehouse in spring 2014 when she began looking ahead. Josie has an infectious passion for theatre that responds inventively and urgently to current affairs, but for as wide and popular an audience as possible. It was during a lunch break with the exceptional casting director Alastair Coomer (who coincidentally cast This House before moving to join Josie at the Donmar) that we began talking about how you might create an ‘event’ live on election night – a theatrical response, rather than leaving it entirely to the pundits on television to make sense of events.

What about setting a play in a polling station, with a conveyor belt of actors passing through the space playing voters? What about setting the play at the exact date and time that it was being staged – say the final 90 minutes of polling during the actual final 90 minutes of polling? What if actually you could broadcast it from the theatre live into people’s homes during the last 90 minutes of polling, leading up to the exit poll announcement at 10pm and the declaration of the next government?

There were a lot of ‘ifs’ without knowing how possible any of it was – but through Josie’s determination, belief and ingenuity, we found ourselves a year later with a cast of over 40 actors including Mark Gatiss, Catherine Tate, Nina Sosanya and Judi Dench, with Channel 4 as our broadcasting partner, beaming our play live on election night into people’s homes.

There were many unique challenges (‘opportunities’, I kept trying to call them, to myself, often at 3am in the morning during the most intense working period of my life) to this project. Writing while you cast and casting while you write – the quick script turnaround meaning characters would change from day to day depending on who was available and vice versa (and Alastair Coomer alongside Josie Rourke did a forensic job of exactly matching the gender and ethic make-up of the Lambeth constituency to the cast. This was a play about representation and democracy after all). Other challenges – how do you move the actors through the tiny Donmar Warehouse backstage area, and how do you film it? But the biggest issue was ‘time’. A play can run over and it matters not a bit, but this show, this show had to come down on the bongs of 10pm exactly. The television broadcast wouldn’t wait; there was an exit poll to declare. And because we had set the play in real time – no scene breaks, no cuts – it was like setting some balls rolling at 8.30pm when the red light on the cameras came on and hoping they crossed the line at the exact right point 90 minutes later.

During two weeks of previews we all became a little obsessed about time, as well as the other elements you’re continually focused on. Preview One came down around 10.04.19, Preview Five came down around 9.59.28. We invited the audience in the theatre into the game of it, with a clock on the wall ticking towards its inevitable conclusion.

I’ve never been more impressed with an acting company who got behind the challenge like it was a dragon to slay. And though it sounds like one of those theatrical legends that verges on a lie – I swear to you, we never hit 10pm exactly during any preview, but come election night, with the cameras rolling, I’ll never forget standing at the back of the circle with Josie Rourke, iPhone in hand, as the last line was said and seeing 9.59 flick to 10.00 exactly on the first bong of Big Ben. And yes, it’s possible that both Josie and I burst into tears. Possibly through exhaustion after the last four weeks of madness, possibly out of pride for an acting company that collectively managed to essentially and effortlessly control time like wizards.

We rushed backstage and I stood on the spiral staircase in front of the company to read aloud the exit poll. A Conservative majority. I don’t think any of us expected that . . .

Since that particular moment, politics has become kind of crazy; the challenge for theatre seems almost to be how to match it in terms of drama. How to reflect the national mood, if that is even possible. I’ve always been something of an optimist when it comes to our democratic systems and the people running them – but that optimism and hope becomes more and more tested. The prevalent mood amongst communities and people in this country seems to be an increasingly very simple, ancient one – anger.

The Angry Brigade was built with director James Grieve and the amazing Paines Plough company in collaboration with the Plymouth Drum, before moving to the Bush Theatre in 2015, also during the general election. I had last been at the Bush five years earlier on The Whisky Taster, also directed by James. Much like The Vote, I guess it was something of an experiment in form. Two separate theatrical styles applied to the two different halves of the play – one dramatizing the police doing the chasing, the other depicting the group of ‘anarchists’ trying to avoid being caught.

The case of these four counter culture revolutionaries, or anarchists, or extremists, whatever you want to call them depending on wherever it is you stand, is one of those exciting real life stories you come across which when you do you can’t believe you never came across it before. A cell of four young intellectuals (allegedly) setting bombs off across London – the Albert Hall, the Post Office tower – to bring down the Conservative government of the day and establish a new socio-political order leading to, upon their capture, the longest trial in English legal history. The parallels to today – an increasingly politicized youth in the face of growing generational inequality through austerity; disillusion with established party politics; the constant looming threat of ‘terror, all made it a seemingly resonant time to explore.

Monster Raving Loony, however, was an appropriately less clear-headed prospect. I knew I wanted to tackle David Sutch – the working-class Harrow boy who affected his own noble title, invented his own party, dressed up in provocatively garish attire in order to stand (and fail) in more elections than anyone else in history. The idea of trying to tell his story through the popular comic styles of the time, reflecting both his – and Britain’s – search for a voice, an identity post-war emerged slower. And by the time we reached workshop stage, I remember the director memorably summing up to the small crowd who came to test it out: ‘We came here to establish if it could be done, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that it should.’

Well – we did; inviting the audience into a communal space (ostensibly a working men’s club, the type I used to go when I was younger while my mum worked behind the bar) by creating a community between them and the live performers.





This House





This House had its world premiere at the Cottesloe Theatre on 25 September 2012. The cast and creative team were as follows:

Labour Whips

Michael Cocks Vincent Franklin

Walter Harrison Philip Glenister

Bob Mellish Phil Daniels

Joe Harper Richard Ridings

Ann Taylor Lauren O’Neil



Tory Whips

Humphrey Atkins Julian Wadham

Jack Weatherill Charles Edwards

Fred Silvester Ed Hughes



The Members’ Chorus

Clockmaker/Redditch/Nuneaton/ Peebles/Ensemble Gunnar Cauthery

Batley/Ensemble Christopher Godwin

Walsall N/Plymouth Sutton/ Speaker 2/Ensemble Andrew Havill

Coventry SW/ Lady Batley/ Ensemble Helena Lymbery

Paddington S/Chelmsford/ S Ayrshire/Henley/Ensemble Matthew Pidgeon

Speaker 1/Liverpool Edgehill/ Ensemble Giles Taylor

Bromsgrove/Abingdon/Paisley/ Fermanagh/Ensemble Tony Turner

Esher/Ensemble Rupert Vansittart



When the production transferred to the Olivier Theatre on 23 February 2013, Reece Dinsdale took over from Philip Glenister and David Hounslow from Richard Ridings.

Director Jeremy Herrin

Designer Rae Smith

Lighting Designer Paule Constable

Music Stephen Warbeck

Choreographer Scott Ambler

Sound Designer Ian Dickinson





Characters

Labour Whips

Michael Cocks, forties, Yorkshireman

Walter Harrison, fifties, Yorkshireman

Bob Mellish, fifties, Londoner

Joe Harper, fifties, Yorkshireman

Ann Taylor, twenties, Lancashire

Tory Whips

Humphrey Atkins, fifties, Berkshire

Jack Weatherill, fifties, Worcestershire

Fred Silvester, thirties, London

The roles opposite can be played either by an ensemble of actors, ranging from one extreme (one actor per MP) to the other (a small handful playing all parts). Invention is encouraged.





The Members’ Chorus

Bromsgrove

Woolwich West

Rochester and Chatham

Paddington South

Esher

Belfast West

Belfast North

Armagh

Fermanagh

Western Isles

Merioneth

Caernarfon

Peebles

Walsall North

Ilford North

Thurrock

Coventry North West

Redditch

Chelmsford

Plymouth Sutton

Abingdon

Batley

Paisley

South Ayrshire

Henley

Lowestoft

Stirlingshire West

Liverpool Edge Hill

Welwyn and Hatfield

St Helen’s

Coventry South West

Newham North East

West Lothian

Rushcliffe

Ashfield

Perry Bar

Birmingham

Stechford

Mansfield

Glasgow Garscadden

The Strangers’ Gallery

Speaker

Clerk

Clockmaker

Teller

Serjeant at Arms

Lady Batley

Paramedic

Barber





This House is a fictional account which has been inspired by true events. The incidents, characters and time lines have been changed for dramatic purposes. In some cases fictitious characters and incidents have been added to the plot and the words are those imagined by the author. The play should not be understood as biography or any other factual account.

A Note on Staging

The play is set in the Palace of Westminster.

The main locations are the Government Whips’ Office and the Opposition Whips’ Office, located either side of the Members’ Lobby.

The Members’ Chorus sit in the House of Commons Chamber, set to one side or at the back. The Members stand and assume the part of the MP for their particular constituency when called by the Speaker, who sits in the Speaker’s Chair observing the action.





Prologue

The Westminster Clock Tower.

The small anteroom behind the famous Big Ben clock face, looming large and high.

Michael Cocks stands, back to us, staring out through the frosted panels of the clock.

The Division Bell rings.

The Speaker rises from his chair in the Commons Chamber.

Speaker Order. ORDER!

The Members’ Lobby. Members are running around the palace in a panic – announced, as always, by the Speaker as they enter.

Speaker The Member for Bromsgrove! The Member for Woolwich West!

Bromsgrove Oi, Bill. (Whistles.) Bill, what’s the bother?

Woolwich West He’s bloody going, i’nt he?! Off to see the Queen.

Bromsgrove No, bollocks, says who?

Woolwich West Harrison.

Bromsgrove . . . Walter? Oh no . . .

Woolwich West Some time today. That’s it, another bastard election. (Goes.)

Bromsgrove Oh, shit-a-fucking-brick, no – (Goes to run.)

Speaker The Member for Rochester and Chatham!

Rochester and Chatham Is it true?

Bromsgrove You should know, he’s your leader, love. (Goes.)

Rochester and Chatham Oh don’t be like that. Terry!

Speaker The Member for Paddington South!

Paddington South enters, holding a red ministerial box.

Rochester and Chatham Well?

Paddington South ARSE!

Rochester and Chatham It’s true, then?

Paddington South Bloody typical, the Labour lot catch wind of it first and we’re in ruddy power. Shows who your friends are. Christ!

Rochester and Chatham Look, the Deputy.

Paddington South Jack!

Jack Weatherill, the Conservative Deputy Whip, enters. He wears an incredible suit.

Weatherill Afternoon.

Paddington South Is it true, he’s calling it today?

Weatherill I understand your concern –

Rochester and Chatham Concern?

Weatherill – and rest assured, both of you, when there’s news, if there’s news, it will be announced through the usual channels. Please excuse me. (Goes.)

Paddington South (calling after) The usual channels? Come on, Walter Harrison is already spreading it around like shit on a field! How can a Labour whip be announcing it before the Tories? Jack?

The Government Whips’ Office, to one side of the Members’ Lobby.

One main office with an adjoining door to another, off. Desks, sofas, TV, safe, drinks cabinet.

Humphrey Atkins sits calmly, listening to classical music.

Weatherill enters.

Weatherill Chief. Bit of a to-do out there. (Begins clearing out his drawers.)

Atkins I imagine so, yes. Just enjoying the calm before the storm.

Speaker The Member for Paddington South!

Atkins Enter.

Paddington South knocks on the door. Atkins gets to his feet now and begins to ‘pack away’ with real purpose, emptying his (black) ministerial briefcase, even shredding paper. Throughout this, the lights occasionally dim and flicker, due to power shortages.

Paddington South I don’t believe it, Chief – bloody hell. Finally, I finally get my hands on one of these. (His box.)

Weatherill Please, there’s a good chap, / this really isn’t the . . .

Paddington South But I won’t be coming back you know. The seat’ll go red this time, you just watch. It’s anarchy out there, blue-arsed flies.

Atkins That’s why they call it a snap election, Nicholas. It isn’t a ‘bend slowly until it gives’ election, it isn’t a ‘stir gently over a medium heat, reduce to simmer and then serve’ election. It’s a ‘snap’. Quick and painless, off like a plaster –

The phone rings.

Paddington South Painless?! Hah!

Atkins (answering) Whoever you are, yes, it’s true, clear your desk. (Phone down.) A key component in the element of surprise is the element of surprise.

Clerk knocks.

Weatherill Come in.

The Clerk enters, and during the remaining dialogue Atkins removes everything from his black box and hands it to the Clerk, as well as keys, signing everything away.

Paddington South Dammit, what a rotten bloody system this is, the whole thing. God!

Atkins (as he de-junks) Cruel as it may seem at this present juncture, this ‘rotten system’, the foundation stone of democracy, is one of the few things this country has manufactured and exported that hasn’t been sent back. Envied the world over for its simplicity. One person, one vote, sending one member, to represent them in one house. And the party with more warm bodies than any other, governs. As one.

Paddington South Yes, but this time they won’t be sending me back, that’s what I’m saying!

Weatherill (warmly) You’ll be fine, Nick. Chin up.

Atkins (carrying on) And this building, this hallowed earth upon which we stand, this mother of all parliaments – yes she’s showing her age, but like all good ‘mums’, she’s showing it with dignity and with grace – (To Clerk, taking back some keys.) hang on – this House serves to remind us that we are but its temporary trustees, Nicholas. (Removing his key fob.) This is mine. (Handing back the keys.)

Clerk begins retrieving Paddington South’s red case – emptying it, keys, signature.

Atkins And when Parliament dissolves at 5 p.m. today, I am no longer the Member for Spelthorne, nor Jack the Member for Croydon North East, nor you the Member for Paddington South. But Paddington, sadly, will go on without you. It is a lesson we all must learn. Earth, and dust. (Lightly touching his black case on the table.) Hope to see you again, old friend.

Clerk exits, taking with him the two cases.

The Opposition Whips’ Office – the other side of the Members’ Lobby.

Bob Mellish, Labour Chief Whip, has also begun to pack up, picking from sausage and chips wrapped in newspaper as he goes.

Speaker The Member for Bromsgrove!

Bromsgrove (entering, sees Mellish packing) Oh, Jesus Christ.

Mellish No, it’s Bob actually, but the likeness is uncanny. Saveloy?

Bromsgrove Chief, what’s going on?

Mellish Look I know as much as you do, Terry; where the bleeding ’ell is Walter – ?

Walter Harrison, Labour Deputy Whip, bursts in, closing the door behind him.

A beat. Waiting . . .

Harrison raises his arms in victory, cheering. Mellish then follows suit.

Harrison WHEY!

Bromsgrove Oh no.

Mellish We are on our way back! Come on! (Continues packing away, with Harrison now.) Where are the others? Where’s Cocks?

Harrison Michael? Dunno.

Bromsgrove Yeah, alright for you, innit? Not defending a tiny majority, are you? Eighteen hundred, me! What are you, Walter – Wakefield? Ha ha. Wake – Kill for Wakefield, bloody hell. Couldn’t have given me an effing mining town, could they? Mill town, salt of the earth, no. And they’ve only gone and merged me with Redditch, now. Redditch, for God’s sake; that’s killed it.

Harrison Bugger off; Redditch? It’s manufacture, / industry, workers –

Bromsgrove Oh, bollocks, honestly Walter, that’s . . . needles, that’s all they make, that’s all they bloody well make in Redditch. Needles. That’s it.

Harrison (at the chips) Oi, what’s this, no mushy peas? Travesty.

Mellish Oh give over, ‘mushy peas’.

Bromsgrove Chaps –

Harrison Like having a bath with no bubbles.

Mellish You uncouth Northern brute, you –

Bromsgrove I’M BEING SERIOUS! . . .

They’ll boot me out. ’Cause I did what I was told, towed the party line, stayed loyal.

Harrison Do you ever look up at the sky? Terry? Ever watch the way birds move en masse? Their ability to survive lies in the fact they all imperceptibly, instinctively, turn together. On our own, we’re nowt. That’s the job of the whips. The job is to transmit in a way that is undetectable to the eagles circling above, the job is to communicate the instruction ‘Turn’. ‘Turn now.’ ‘Turn all of us, together, now, and we might make it. We might just bloody well make it.’

Bromsgrove I hate birds. They shit on you from a great height.

Harrison You’ll be alright. And if not, there’s other elections, other seats.

Beat.

Bromsgrove (nods, turning sadly; stops, turning back) Oh what’s the point of it all . . . ? Eh . . . ? What’s the bloody . . . point?

He exits.

Mellish Don’t worry about him, he’ll be OK.

Harrison Yeah. Although, no, he won’t be, will he, but . . .

Mellish That’s life.

Harrison That’s politics.

Harrison leaves the Opposition office, stepping into:

Members’ Lobby. Bumping into Weatherill, coming the other way. They don’t shake.

Weatherill Ah, Walter. The ‘man of the hour’.

Harrison Jack. I see you’re off to inspect the troops. (At his large notebook.) My oh my, look at this, that’s a new one, what is it, leather? Bit big, though.

Weatherill Oh, do you think? I rather like it, substantial, plus the lines are not too thick.

Harrison (taking a small notebook from his back pocket) Here, look, see? Small and simple.

Weatherill (taking his, flicking) Hmm, yes, ‘old reliable’. Well, not without its charms, easily accessible I suppose, but where’s that sense of authority, Walter? The weight of information.

Harrison Members see a big fat thing like that, they think you’re compensating for something.

Weatherill Ah, well. You believe what you like. I must get on.

Harrison So will I still be dealing with you, do you think, after the big heave-ho, the old switcheroo?

Weatherill I’ll go where I’m put, Walter, of course; and ‘switcheroo’ – come off it, you know we’re staying in. I mean / yes, of course –

Harrison Staying in, have you / seen the polls?

Weatherill It will be tight. Yes, I have seen the polls, Walter; we’re in the lead in the polls –

Harrison Only just; nowt in it.

Weatherill In dark times, the electorate sticks with the devil it knows.

Harrison Ay up, they’re only dark because you can’t keep the lights on! I mean surely the most basic test of a government is that they can keep the blinking lights on, Jack?

Weatherill Still, after all this, perhaps you’ll finally get to be the Chief Whip now, ‘Deputy’.

Harrison Well. Perhaps you will be your side, an’ all, ‘Deputy’. (Makes to go.)

Weatherill And, erm. How did you find out so quickly? The election?

Harrison I don’t kiss and tell, Jack. Should know that about me by now.

Weatherill (beat; holding his hand out) Walter.

Harrison (shaking it) Jack.

Up in the Clock Tower. Cocks is still facing the clock, staring out. Clockmaker arrives, climbing up the stairs, into the room, jangling keys.

Clockmaker ’Bout done, are we, Mr Cocks? Only they’ll be coming up to turn the light off.

Cocks Oh. Yeah, no. Course. Ta for letting me, uh . . .

Clockmaker That’s alright. My predecessor, he left me a note. ‘Mr Cocks goes up the clock, no questions asked.’

I thought it were a nursery rhyme at first. (Beat. Pointing up.) What’s the deal with the light, anyway?

Cocks The Ayrton Light, above the clock. Shines when Parliament is seated; put out when it rises. Lot of funny rules and traditions here, you’ll start to learn.

Clockmaker Londoner all my life, me, never even knew you could stand behind that thing.

Cocks Most famous face in the world. Never stopped ticking, you know, since it first, like . . . Even during the war, the Blitz, bombs raining down. Stubbornly, just – kept on ticking.

Clockmaker Yeah, well, it’s only a couple ticks away from the old, uh . . . so come on.

Cocks exits swiftly down the stairs, as Big Ben begins to strike. The Ayrton Light snaps off –

Brief sound bites of the February 1974 general election as in the dimly lit Commons Chamber the Members chorus take their seats: ‘Tories predicted victory’ – ‘Exit polls suggest a tight race’ – ‘Margaret Thatcher discounting the Liberals, preferring two-party politics’ – ‘First hung parliament in half a century’ – ‘The “squatter in Downing Street” ’ – Dimbleby chasing St John Stevas: ‘Will Tories do deal with Liberals?’ – No deal – ‘Labour form a minority government’.





Act One

Scene One

The Government Whips’ Office. Afternoon.

Humphrey Atkins is packing a box. Bob Mellish bounces in with his own box of things.

Mellish (mockingly) Oh Humphrey, me ol’ cocker –

Atkins Oh, don’t start, Bob, alright?

Mellish Start? Moi?!

Atkins Let’s at least try and conduct this transfer with a modicum of decorum, shall we –

Mellish A ‘modicum of decorum’, blimey what’s that, odds on favourite for the 2.15?

Atkins That’s a ‘no’ then, I take it. (Lifting a painting from the wall.)

Mellish You can leave that if you like –

Atkins Get your own. Gift from my wife, anniversary.

Mellish Look, I’m sorry, Humphrey, genuine commiserations and all that. Politics is a cruel sport, second place gets you naff all.

Atkins Yes, well, in – ha ha, in your case, Bob, first place gets you ‘naff all’ as well. Four seats more than us? Labour may be the largest party, but not a majority in the House. Some might say that means we all lost.

Mellish And yet here we are, swapping offices. A few small steps across the lobby, but a giant leap for mankind.

Atkins Bob. It’s a hung parliament. You’ve got no idea, have you? (Making to leave.)

Mellish Oi, what’s your combination for the safe? I need to change it.

Atkins I’ll inform the Clerk, he can come and arrange for it to –

Mellish Oh come on, Humphrey, just give me your bloody –

Atkins Bob, no, I’m not telling you, / it’s a combination that –

Mellish Oh well, that’s grown up, isn’t it?

Atkins (continuing) – we’ve been using for . . . It’s not about being ‘grown up’.

Mellish So / how am I meant to – Right, OK.

Atkins (continuing) It’s about protocol, Bob, procedure; call the Clerk.

Mellish Fine. Oi. (Holding out his hand.) No hard feelings, eh?

Atkins (beat; putting down; shakes) Listen. I mean this, because I like you –

Mellish Oh Humphrey, I like you too, come here.

Atkins We’re going to get you. Alright? So don’t get comfortable. A minority government? No one with any sense or gumption gives you more than a matter of weeks. You’re gonna fall, and fast, and hard. So start finding things to land on. Now.

Atkins goes. Mellish less cocksure now. Beat. Harrison enters, laughing, clapping.

Harrison Wheeey. Home sweet home, Chief.

Mellish We’re fucked. We’re fucked, aren’t we?

Cocks enters, carrying some files and boxes. Harrison and Mellish snap out of it, cheering.

Harrison Alright, Michael. Here we are, eh? (Offering his hand.)

Cocks I know – quick, lock the doors before they realise. (Shaking.)

Joe Harper enters, in full State Opening regal garb, to more cheers.

Mellish Bloody ’ell, Joe, look at you, joining the circus or what?

Harper Laugh all you want, Chief, but you have to treat me with a bit of respect now I’m a servant to Her Majesty’s Government. No-o, I just played a ‘key role’ in the opening of Parliament, and not only that, look at this, me white staff! (Displays it, laughing.) Get to keep it for ever, this. I’m gonna wander round with it always. At work, round the house. Tesco’s.

Ann Taylor enters, holding a box. Mellish cheers, as per, expecting the others to . . . but they just stare. A beat. Mellish clears his throat.

Taylor Hello.

Harrison Looking for your office, love? ’Tis a bit of a maze, here / let’s see if –

Mellish No, she’s not looking for it, she’s found it. This is Ann Taylor, new Member for Bolton. She’ll be joining our team. And I know everyone’ll make her feel very welcome.

Harrison . . . Uh yeah, course. Here, Ann, take a seat –

Mellish She’s a woman, Walter, not an invalid.

Harrison Well, alright! I was just –

Taylor No, that’s fine, honestly. Thank you. ‘Walter’?

Mellish (at the walls) Art! I need art, someone get me some art.

Clerk (entering, with the black briefcase) Gentlemen.

Harrison ( pointing) And lady.

Mellish Nothing with a ship on it – what’s this?

The Clerk gets Mellish ‘set up’, handing him passes and demonstrating the case on his desk.

Clerk Your ministerial box.

Harper It’s black, not red.

Clerk The Chief Whip’s is black.

Harrison ‘The forces of darkness, and evil’ . . .

Mellish Do pack it in.

Clerk Key. Opens from the bottom, not the top. It’s heavy, you’ll get used to the weight.

Mellish (taking it) I know, I know. I have done this before, you know?

Harper (having a go) Flippin’ ’eck, have your arm off, that.

Clerk (taking it back, opening, demonstrating) Lead surround. Traditionally so that if your ship sank, it would sink to the bottom of the ocean. In reality, it’s for bomb blasts.

Mellish Bomb blasts?

Clerk To protect the contents.

Mellish What about my contents?

Clerk They aren’t Parliament’s concern. (Handing the case over and leaving.)

Mellish (after him) And can I get some art? Oi, and the phones too, they don’t . . . (Sighs.)

Cock (sitting, playing) Walter, look. Adjustable chairs.

Harrison Never! (Sitting.) Ha! All this time, them bastards! Bloody ’ell, I knew their poll ratings had been up and down all year but I didn’t know their arses had as well.

Mellish Eh, should see how comfy it is in the back seat of my car – oh wait, didn’t I mention, I get back my ministerial car?

Harrison Oh, you smug little tart, Chief.

Mellish Right, let’s stop mucking about, shall we?

He turns a blackboard over – during this, and for the rest of the play, the whips should light up fags and smoke as and whenever fits. Most should probably spark up now . . .

Mellish Now. I don’t know if any of you have read a newspaper this week but apparently we, the Labour Party, are now in power.

All Whey-hey.

Mellish With one big problem.

Harper Aww.

Mellish It’s a mathematical problem, and one we definitely have to balance. 301, us. The Tories 297. And then we have the odds and sods. Liberals 14, the Scots 7, Irish 11, Welsh 2, others 3, meaning an Opposition total of 334. (Writes ‘Total 301 v. 334.)

[The table created could look something like this:



Mellish In other words, we’re all up shit creak, we’ve got the biggest boat, but they’ve got more paddles. Or to put it a simpler way . . . combined, there are more of them than us.

This sinks in.

So how do we survive? Answer: haven’t a clue. None us has any experience of a hung parliament, so it’s a learn-on-the-job type thing. But we are going to war, gentlemen, so make no bones. On the other side of the lobby are a bunch of bastards – sorry, Ann – already plotting our demise . . .

Speaker The Member for Esher!

The Opposition Whips’ Office.

Atkins unpacking at his new desk. Esher drinks a whisky.

Esher It stinks over here.

Atkins No it doesn’t.

Esher Always has, this side. Nasty ruddy odour. And it’s colder.

Atkins Was there anything I can help you with, Colonel?

Esher My new office, don’t like it. It’s cramped and there’s this ugly painted thing in there.

Atkins That’s the Member for Gloucester, Colonel, she’s sharing your room.

Fred Silvester knocks and enters.

Silvester Mr Atkins? How do you do, I’m / Fred Silvester –

Atkins Fred Silvester; new member for Manchester Withington, formerly of Walthamstow West. Welcome back. Nice to know we picked up a few seats while haemorrhaging others. You’ve been assigned to the Whips? (Taking his letter.)

Esher Manchester you say? God awful place, can’t be doing with it. Either needs a good clean or a good fire, I don’t mind which.

Atkins Colonel, Mr Silvester here will relocate you to a new office this afternoon.

Silvester Oh, right. Yes, of course.

Esher Posture, man. People aren’t afraid of a man who slouches. I’ll be in the Smoking Room, let me know when that banshee is exorcised from my office.

He exits. Atkins takes out a phone wire cable from his pocket and smiles, dumping it in his bin.

Atkins The ‘spoils of war’. (Reading Silvester’s file.) You were in advertising.

Silvester Yes. Well, sort of.

Atkins You either were or you weren’t.

Silvester I was.

Atkins It should help, of course. Called to the bar, I see.

Silvester Gray’s Inn.

Atkins He’s right about your posture, you know.

Silvester I’ll work on it.

Atkins Do you prefer Fred or Frederick?

Silvester Fred’s fine.

Weatherill enters, clutching his folder. Sharply dressed, as ever.

Weatherill Oh, Chief. How boring, this whole thing.

Atkins So I’m starting to realise. Jack Weatherill, Governm – . . . Opposition Deputy Whip; Fred Silvester of / Manchester Withington –

Weatherill Oh, Manchester Withington, formerly Walthamstow West, yes, hello.

Silvester How do you do. Gosh, what a fine suit, I must say.

Weatherill Oh, thank you.

Atkins Yes, Jack has many a fine suit – (Looking up at his painting.) This look alright, here?

Weatherill (handing Silvester a card) Family are tailors by trade, place up on Savile Row. You should pop along. I don’t mean – not to imply that you need to.

Silvester No, of course.

Weatherill But, you know.

Atkins Fred was about to begin the annual game of musical chairs, weren’t you, Fred?

Silvester Yes – oh, right, yes. (Exits.)

Weatherill (calling after) Have fun. (To Atkins.) Seems a good sort, bit wet behind the ears.

Atkins So were we all once. They dry out. (Goes to adjust his chair, and realises it isn’t adjustable. Tutting.) Oh. The chairs, for God’s . . . (Sighs.) I swear, Jack. This is but a temporary situation. It’ll be over by Christmas.

Weatherill Hmm, ‘over by Christmas’, where have I heard that before?

Government Whips’ Office.

Mellish Obviously the Tories are gonna vote against us every time, all the time, so what then? (Looks around. A sense of him ‘grooming’ the quiet one, here . . .) Michael?

Cocks Uh, well. Our only hope of getting bills through the House is the odds and sods, drawing ’em over to our side.

Walter, he’s built up the contacts, made the relationships –

Mellish We all have to have those relationships now, can’t just rely on Walter. And Michael’s right. A ‘rainbow’ coalition. And as you know, at the end of the rainbow is a pot of gold.

Harrison Oh, lovely, Chief, beautiful.

Mellish That said, the world and his wife gives us about as much chance of lasting the spring as an Austin Allegro climbing a hill –

Harper I’ve sold it! So bugger off.

Mellish In fact we might even be the shortest government that e’er bloody lived –

Cocks But we can still lose votes in the Commons and survive, can’t we? Only way we can be booted out is losing a Vote of No Confidence.

Mellish Bingo, we lose a Confidence Vote, our PM is forced to go to the Queen. Historically rare, obviously, because governments normally have a majority. Well we don’t.

Opposition Whips’ Office. Atkins at a board, same figures.

Weatherill and Silvester.

Atkins Naturally there is a way for Parliament itself to boot out a government, and that’s a No Confidence. If more than half the House join us against them, we force them out, but to get to that point is politically tricky; they have to be seen to be incapable of passing bills.

Weatherill All comes down to the odds and sods then, right? Tug of war. I mean, I know traditionally we’re more averse to ‘deals’ than Labour, but given the state of affairs –

Atkins No, I agree, needs must.

Weatherill And I see no reason why Walter Harrison should have sole monopoly on cross-party relationships in the House. I th – I really think I could try shifting the balance.

Atkins Very well, Jack, I release you from your binds, go forth and multiply.

Silvester (with a diary) Or better still, make sure most of the odds and sods can’t even be here in the first place? Because, well. Scottish school holidays start a week before ours, if we manage to table some votes for then, any Scot Nat members who’d support their first raft of bills will be stuck at home, along with Labour Scottish MPs.

Weatherill My word, that’s a strike above the bowler’s head if ever I saw one. Bravo, Fred.

Atkins (gathers things) Alright chaps, The Usual Channels are now open, it’s time to ride out into the field. And remember, our one advantage is our, um, oh how do I put this so it won’t sound . . . I can’t, our ‘class’. Labour Whips are foul-mouthed, brutish, trade unionist –

Government Whips’ Office.

Mellish – toffee-nosed, arse-licking, dick-wanking wankers, sorry Ann, with silver spoons in their mouths and rods up their arses. Full of Baronets and Major Generals, their weakness is their inflexibility, so exploit it. (Checks watch.) Speaking of which, the aristo-twats will be on their way now. I just want Cocks and Harrison, newcomers bugger off.

Harper (exiting, with Taylor) Have fun, chaps.

Mellish Walter, feet or arse?

Harrison Feet, I thought, pacing on this angle, arms folded. (Demonstrates pacing with ‘threatening concern’.)

Cocks I say it’s all in the chairs, their mistake when we’d come here is letting us sit together so we can pass notes. Let’s perform the old Trafalgar, split the fleet, me between these two –

Harrison Lean forward too – Atkins and Weatherill, they’re ‘recliners’, it’s all this – (Sits, shows.) Leaning back, legs crossed, like a fucking Jane Austen character, swooning –

Mellish I know, I’ll do the old ‘I’m busy but good busy’ at my desk, / keep ’em waiting.

(From a knock at the door.) Walter, tell a joke – come in!

Harrison – Leeds United.

The Government Whips laugh politely as the Opposition Whips enter.

Atkins Afternoon, Gentlemen.

Harrison How do, Humphrey. Jack. New boy.

Atkins Shall we begin?

Together, the three Opposition Whips sit, cross their legs and open their files. Slick.

Beat. Cocks and Harrison take up their position, Cocks leaning forward, between Weatherill and Silvester. Harrison perched on a desk, near Atkins.

Mellish is shuffling around some papers on his desk. He scribbles a few notes –distracted. The Opposition Whips patiently wait. Weatherill dusts down his trousers.

Mellish OK. Would you like to kick off ?

Atkins Mmm – no, that’s OK, you start.

Mellish Alright, we were looking at this, Rates Bill to open on the 17th, Social Security 20th, Health and Safety Bill the 21st.

Atkins Aha. (Writing. A while.) . . . Yes, doesn’t work for us, Social Security; that last week of April would be preferable – Harrison, wouldn’t you like a chair, can’t be doing your back any good?

Mellish Few days before Easter, surely you’re worried about getting your members in?

Weatherill Hmm – no, actually, and it gives the Bill longer in committee, so the 26th then?

Mellish Oh wait, look, Scottish school holidays then so Scots MPs will struggle to be here.

Atkins Oh, that’s a shame. Still, can’t revolve around seven Scottish Nationalists.

Cocks Well we’ve got Scots in our party too, as have the Liberals.

Atkins I don’t think we have any Scots in our party, do we Jack. Any Tory Scots?

Weatherill Well, there is Teddy, but . . .

Harrison Do your private school kids break up the same week as our state school kids or is that different too?

Atkins Well done, Walter, three minutes in and you’ve already played the class card, I think that’s a record. I take it the swearing is due to flow shortly as well?

Harrison Bollocks, bugger, piss.

Atkins How lovely, you know walking into here is like walking into a Noël Coward play, isn’t it, Jack? Michael, do you have to lean so far for – Doesn’t anyone from the north know how to sit on a chair? It’s very simple, just imagine it’s like a hay bale or coal sack, it’s exactly the same principle, you’ll get used to it.

Harrison Oi, you, that’s slander that is. (Moving to sit in a chair at a desk near Cocks.) Right that’s it. Michael? (Handing him a pad and pencil.) Take this down –

Cocks presses the peddle, lowering Harrison’s seat, handing the pad back.

Harrison Thank you.

Harrison, Cocks and Mellish burst into laughter. The Tories sigh, though perhaps Weatherill struggles not to smile?

Harrison Eh, adjustable chairs! Kept them quiet, didn’t yer?

Mellish OK, look, I think we all know what’s happening, so just come clean, what do you want?

Atkins Three more Opposition supply days and Health to be on the 18th not 21st.

Mellish Two supply days, and yes to the 18th.

Atkins and Weatherill Done.

Atkins (standing) Gentlemen, that was thrilling. Nice try on the chair formation too, big fan of Trafalgar, aren’t you, Jack?

Harrison Ta ta ladies – looking beautiful as ever, Jack.

Cocks Actually, Jack, I’ve got a hole in my coat, would you mind sewing it up for me?

Weatherill Sorry, Michael, I don’t work with man-made fibres.

Beat. Harrison goes and opens the adjoining office door.

Harrison Ann! Joe!

Harper and Taylor enter. Mellish hands out cards.

Mellish Right, time to haul in the odds and sods, OK? Joe, you take the Scots. Walter, the Irish –

Harrison Yup.

Mellish Ann, I want you to charm the Liberals, I’ve a gut instinct. Michael, try the Welsh.

Cocks The Welsh? All two of them?

Mellish Yes, all two of them, as important as the rest, because as of today we are in the process of making deals. Hop it, the lot o’ yer.

Harper and Cocks exit, Harrison nips into the adjoining office, offstage.

Mellish Ann, could you just wait, one tick. Here’s your region card, I’ve given you North-West. These are our MPs, Labour, and now your responsibility, they’re the sheep, you’re the shepherd. Don’t ever bloody let on these lists exist.

Members can’t stand the idea they get ticked off like shopping. If they’re not in to vote when asked, you’re responsible. We’ll only try to pair the dying or ministers off on duty.

Taylor ‘Pairing’, right, and that’s used when someone can’t get to the House to vote, one of theirs sits out for one of ours.

Mellish Or vice versa. It’s sort of a gentleman’s agreement, pairing, goes back, well, for ever. (To Taylor, from his pocket.) Here’s your screwdriver, keep it with you at all times.

Taylor Screwdriver?

Mellish Flushing; take the top corridor north.

Taylor North top what?

Mellish Toilets. Flushing. When a vote’s called and the division bell rings you’ve eight minutes to get members through the lobby, each whip takes a toilet, go in and try and work out if the feet in the cubicle are Labour or not. If they are, flush’em out. Everything OK?

Taylor Well. I suppose I was wondering . . . why me?

Mellish Why not? Quick up the party ladder, only twenty-six, already made waves. I’m not as daft as I look.

Taylor I suppose I’m just wondering . . . it’s obviously all quite . . . well ‘macho’. In here –

Mellish Oh, well, thank you.

Taylor And I just didn’t want to feel like the . . . oh, well, look, you know what. The ‘token girl’.

Mellish Well you are, though. (Off her look.) What? I’m the token cockney geezer, I get on side the other cockney geezers, Walter Harrison, he’s a Yorkshire Bruiser, he gets on side all the Yorkshire bruisers, I’ve got Lancashire good cops and East Midland bad cops, what I ain’t and never had is one of you. Politics is representation, end of the day, eh?

Taylor Fine. Just don’t feel you have to tone it down –

Mellish Sod that – a bird in the office? We’ll be cranking it up. (Leading her out.) Like football?

Taylor Bolton Wanderers.

Mellish That’s a no, then.

Exiting with her . . .

Scene Two

Around the Lobby: the Strangers’ Bar, the Smoking Room, the Terrace, St Mary’s Crypt.

Speaker The Members for Belfast West, Belfast North, Armagh and Fermanagh!

Strangers’ Bar. Harrison with the Irish members. Belfast West, the ringleader.

Fermanagh Bartender!

Belfast West The thing is, Walter, I hope you know what you’re asking us to do here.

Fermanagh If I’d known there were so many bars in Parliament, I’d have stood for election years ago, you know?

Belfast West I mean asking us, us, me, to blindly support you, the British Government – well you know, the ‘sort of’ government, bless yers – I hope you know what you’re actually asking.

Armagh I’m happy to consider an arrangement, Walter, but it’s got to be give and take, you know? We’ve got to get something back.

Belfast North Like the boundary changes.

Armagh And the pipeline –

Belfast North Ooh yeah, the pipeline.

Harrison I can promise our door will always be open, nothing is off the table to our friends.

Belfast West Most of us signed up to abstain on bloody everything – protest.

Harrison Abstaining we can handle, just don’t walk through the lobby against us.

Belfast North So le – let me get this straight. You want us to do nothing, as soon as possible? (Thinks . . . ) Alright, done.

Belfast West I’ll tell you what, nationalist though I may be, I’m still a Labour man at heart –

Fermanagh (at his beer) I can’t see how you keep the prices so low. What are your margins –

Belfast West Would you stop your jabbering, I’m talking politics here.

Fermanagh Yeah, but there’s a time and a place.

Belfast West It’s a weekday afternoon in the House of Commons!

Fermanagh I stand by my original assertion.

Belfast West What I’m saying is: for asking so nicely, I’ll vote with you, for now, and we’ll see how we go. OK?

Harrison Smashing! And, ay up, look, I know it’s a bugger, travelling over here, leaving the family, so remember, you get flights and hotels for the missus. We can bring ’em over to stay, three times a year.

Fermanagh (lowering his drink, exchanging glances) Don’t you fuckin’ dare!

Government Whips’ Office. Harrison steps to his blackboard, wiping figures from the opposition side, reducing their total. He heads out, Taylor and Mellish closely behind him, getting ready to vote.

Mellish It’s what makes our job so hard, it’s about flesh and blood at the end of the day, you vote with your bodies. You can’t phone it in from China, can’t send it through the post, can’t even stay sat and raise your hand. Unless you put one foot in front of the other and pass through the lobby, you don’t count. It’s archaic, it’s old-fashioned, it’s bollocks; but somehow it works.

Speaker The Member for Western Isles!

The Tea Room. Harper drinking tea with the Scots. Western Isles their Party Leader.

Western Isles It feels funny, us wee Scot Nats getting this ‘romantic’ attention, suddenly. Before the last election, I was the only one here. I had to ‘whip’ myself. (Laughing.) And I still couldn’t always get the bugger into the lobby!

Harper It’s a manifesto pledge to vote on Scottish devolution and you know full bloody well a Tory Government wouldn’t put that forward, right? If we make it through the summer, everything points to us calling another election and getting a majority. Once that happens, we can start getting stuff done. The big stuff. Together.

Western Isles If you promise to make devolution a priority, we’ll promise not to join a coup against you, OK?

Speaker The Members for Merioneth and Caernarfon!

The River Terrace.

Cocks smoking with the Welsh – Merioneth and Caernarfon.

Merioneth No Bob or Walter today? The big guns aiming at the big targets, then, are they?

Cocks The . . . ? No, I, I wanted, we wanted the Welsh voices to be heard, see.

Merioneth Like a couple of mice, singing in the cats’ choir? (Finishes his fag and flicks it over the side.) I’ve never liked the Thames. It looks . . . diseased.

Alright, look, go back to your bosses and tell ’em this can be a . . . like a rolling thing, what do I mean, like a case-by-case basis, OK? (To Caernarfon.) You happy with that?

Caernarfon smokes. Nods. Flicks his fag over the side.

Merioneth Alright, there you are. Alright? (Offers his hand.) New for you this, is it?

Cocks (beat; takes his hand and shakes) It’s – new for everyone.

Merioneth Remember. Authority is an abstract. If you convince people you have it, then you have it. OK?

They exit, leaving Cocks alone. He stares out, finishing his fag. He goes to flick it in the river, but doesn’t. Drops it to the floor and gently puts it out with his foot.

Speaker The Member for Western Isles!

The Tea Room.

Western Isles as before, now with Weatherill.

Weatherill No doubt their lot will be trying to woo you as well, but for our part –

Western Isles They already have. Got here first.

Weatherill They . . . ? Ah. I see.

Western Isles Jack, you know I respect you, everyone respects you, it’s nothing personal. We’re not walking down the aisle with them but we’re not leaving in the middle of the ceremony either. Not yet anyway. I’m sorry.

Speaker The Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles!

The St Mary’s Undercroft Crypt.

Taylor and Peebles, sitting with his head in his hands.

Taylor I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to interrupt your – I didn’t know you were praying –

Peebles I’m not praying, I’m thinking.

Taylor It’s a bit creepy down here, isn’t it?

Peebles We all need somewhere to go . . .

You know this chapel is over 450 years old. I find clarity in the dignified silence of old things. Centuries’ worth of human endeavour helps put one’s own troubles into a kind of context. I find. (Beat. He stands.) So, Miss Taylor –

Taylor Mrs.

Peebles Let us be clear. We won’t be advising our members to do anything but uphold the principals of the Liberal Party. If they happen to coalesce with yours, then fine and dandy.

Taylor If the Tories call a Vote of No Confidence, would you support it?

Peebles Well. We don’t currently not have confidence in you.

Taylor Spoken like a true politician.

Peebles How would you know, you’ve barely been one for a day? Can I give you a bit of advice? The observations of a third party in a two-party system? A Conservative government always eventually falls because they believe themselves entitled to power. And Labour governments always fall . . . because they don’t. Just a thought.

Speaker The Members for Merioneth and Caernarfon!

The River Terrace, again.

Weatherill with the Welsh Members.

Weatherill Look, I know traditionally our parties are at opposite ends of the spectrum but –

Merioneth Labour would give us and the Scots devolution, come on.

Weatherill Help us bring them down and you’d get an election. Swell your ranks a bit.

Merioneth Nah. Too risky. Sorry, Jack.

He pats his arm, and leaves. Weatherill alone on the terrace.

Government Whips’ Office.

Cocks at a desk, a portable recorder playing a tape. Mellish, Harper and Taylor listening.

Walsall North (off, recorded) ‘I’m floating on my back down the Thames. Underneath . . . what? Lambeth I suppose. Lambeth Bridge . . . And then I . . . ’

Harrison (entering) I got Blyth with us tonight, Independent.

Mellish Shh. Listen.

Walsall North (recorded) ‘ . . . I turn my head. And I see that . . . that the Houses of Parliament are on fire. And suddenly the Thames turns to . . . it turns into blood. Like oil in the darkness.’

Harrison Who the bloody hell’s that?

Cock Walsall North. A tape, someone left for us. Anonymous.

Walsall North (recorded) ‘ . . . and then I see the bodies. Hundreds of them. I recognise them. MPs. They’re flowing out of a hole in the palace. Face down in the blood . . . ’

Cocks What is it, some kind of therapy session. What?

Mellish (presses stop on the tape) Shit. What’s his history? Walsall North, he’s . . . ?

Harrison Businessman. Investments. Married, three kids –

Mellish Oh yeah, yeah, Postmaster General in the last . . . and loyal, right? Far as we know.

Taylor (with a file) His last question in the house was about drowning statistics.

Harrison We need to contain this, don’t want to be losing bloody seats ’cause of nutters.

Mellish Cocks, you call him in.

Cocks Me?

Mellish Ann, go round his missus, have a cup of tea. And his assistant too, uh, ‘Sheila’ – and don’t shoot me a look, alright? It’s not ’cause you a woman, you’re just the – nicest.

Taylor (phone rings) Yes, Chief. (She answers.) Ann Taylor.

Harrison (at blackboard) Right, tonight’s big one, Social Security, it’s tight, only a couple in it.

Mellish (clapping his hands) Keep at it, all of you, come on. Right, pairing. / Joe, you ready?

Cocks (on his phone) John. It’s Michael Cocks. Could you pop down . . . ?

Taylor Alright, thank you. (Putting her phone down.)

Mellish Ann, time to see some pairing in action, we’ve got one off sick, Batley, and a minister away. Joe, it’s your time to shine –

Everyone except Cocks exits into –

The Lobby. Government Whips one side, Opposition the other. Warming up their men . . .

Mellish Alright, Joe, remember, if we don’t cancel out our absentees, we’re down by two.

Weatherill (with Silvester) Right, we’ve got two of our chaps struggling to be here, but I’ve done this job, alright, I know the form. Let them show their hand first, act like it’s no bother to you whether you find a pair or not. Right?

Silvester Right. (Marching forward.)

Harrison (also marching forward, calling so the other side hears) And in the red corner, Joe ‘Hard Man’ Harper.

Harper gives a thumbs-up back to them. Silvester looks back to his team, expectantly.

Atkins . . . Uh, and in the Blue . . . I can’t, I’m sorry.

Silvester (with his book) Alright, Harper. Let’s get this over with.

Harper (with his) Yes, well, as you know the Foreign Secretary is at the summit, and so courtesy dictates you take one of your boys out when a minister is away.

Silvester That’s of course fine, we’ll send one of our boys home.

Harper And then another pair. For Batley. I’ll at home. Any of your boys needing to slip away?

Silvester (looks over his shoulder) Well. Poor Batley. Fine, we’ll pair him too. And may the best men win.

Speaker The Member for Walsall North!

Government Whips’ Office.

Walsall North, distracted and contemplative, is being shown in by Cocks.

Cocks John. Come in. Take a seat. Not too far, though. Ah-ha?

Walsall North Not too . . . ?

Cocks The seat. Don’t take it too . . . because we need it – doesn’t – would you like a drink or anything, drop of the old – or . . . ?

Walsall North Uh, no. No thank you. (Beat. Realises he’s not sitting. Sits.)

Cocks (sits) So how – You know. Are you?

Walsall North . . . I’m . . . (Clears his throat.) I’m fine. Thank you. (Beat.) And how are you?

Cocks Oh, you know. Yes, no yeah. Business alright, all your different . . . businesses?

Walsall North My . . . They’re, wh – has, why, has. Has someone . . .

Cocks No. No, I’m just asking. We’ve got you chalked down for the vote, right?

Walsall North Such an odd feeling, isn’t it? I mean what are we now, getting on to ten – may very well be here till, what, one, one-two? Making the laws of the land, while the land we’re doing it for is dark outside, popped off to bed. Unaware. Just silence. Bar the sound of the river.

Cocks Ignorance is bliss, eh? All that.

Walsall North ‘Ignorance is . . . ’ Yes that’s . . . Very . . .

Ever wonder why they built this on the river? Sort of does give that appearance of floating, doesn’t it? Like an ark. To ‘save us all, when the flood comes’ . . .

People often say that the sea makes them sad, but it’s not the sea, is it? It’s the beach. When you’re out at sea, it’s actually extraordinarily peaceful, but on the beach, looking out at the sea . . . one can’t help but suddenly feel so . . . erm . . . mortal. So aware that one has only a self-contained amount of time. Course you know why, don’t you? It’s because the sound of the tide is the sound of breathing. Sucking air in . . . and pushing it back out. That’s what we’re listening to, as we stand on the edge of the world, having come as far as we can go. We’re listening to our own mortality. Ebbing away. The saddest sound in the world.

Cocks . . . You ever been to Blackpool beach? They have the illuminations, along the sea front. The golden mile. It doesn’t have that, that . . . lonely feeling. Donkey rides as well.

Walsall North Really? Donkey rides?

Cocks For children. Yeah. Just going back and forth –

Walsall North Back and forth?

Cocks Yeah, the . . . donkeys. Along the beach.

Walsall Donkeys. Back and forth, along the beach . . .

Cocks (pause; stands; offers his hand) Well. Cheers, John.

Walsall North looks at Cocks’s hand for a moment before shaking it.

Speaker The Member for Ilford North!

Ilford North I’m just not sure it’s in the interest of my constituents. Perhaps if I had . . . oh, I don’t know, a nice easy chair in my office, that might make me feel more . . . ‘comfortable’?

Harper An easy chair?! (Sighs, writes it down.) Right, easy chair.

Speaker Member for Thurrock?!

Taylor So that’s one new carpet and we’ll see about a place on the Science Committee. Deal?

Speaker Member for Coventry North West!

Harrison (pulling him in, close) Maurice, you voting?!

Coventry North West (scared) Yes.

Harrison Good.

Speaker The Question is, that the Social Security Amendment Bill be now read a second time. As many as are of that oppinion say ‘aye’.

Members Aye!

Speaker To the contrary ‘no’.

Members No!

Speaker Division! Clear the Lobbies! Lock the doors!

The Division Bell rings.

In the chamber: the Members begin filing off the benches, entering the ‘aye’ or the ‘no’ lobby to vote. Harrison is on the ‘aye’ side, waving and cajoling his Labour Members through; on the ‘no’ side,

Weatherill is doing the same.

The Speaker stands in the Chamber.

Speaker Ayes to the right, 282. Noes to the left, 280. The ayes have it!

The Westminster Clock Tower.

Cocks staring out. Audio snippets of the October 1974 General Election play out. The Labour Party gains 18 seats to win a tiny majority in the House of three. Labour 319 seats, the Tories 276.

The music reaches its climax and ends.

Scene Three

Members’ Lobby.

Harrison spills out from a celebration in the Government Whips’ Office, holding a drink, catching Weatherill heading to his Opposition side.

Harrison Oh, Jack, I’m glad I caught you. Listen, I wanted some new curtains for our office, you couldn’t stitch me up a pair could you? Maybe some doilies and a little cushion?

Weatherill You know they say humour is often a way of masking deep insecurities, Walter.

Harrison Oh is that what they say, oh right. Insecurities? Us lot? We’ve just gained a majority in the house, mate, home and dry.

Weatherill Home and dry, with a majority of three? What of heavy traffic, what of children’s violin recitals, what of births and deaths and twisting your ankle? Three MPs can disappear from a vote like that. You may as well be hung –

Harrison I bet we’re in for the full five years.

Weatherill (laughs; stops; beat) You’re not serious?

Harrison Tenner says I’m right.

Weatherill . . . Very well. Five years. (Shakes his hand.) Easiest money I ever made.

Speaker The Member for Bromsgrove and Redditch! Opposition Whips’ Office –’319 v. 316’ on the board.

Atkins looks at the board. Silvester stands with Redditch ‘rehearsing’ as Weatherill enters.

Atkins Arse. Sorry.

Weatherill That’s alright, Chief, emotions running high and all that.

Silvester (to Redditch) Calm, Hal. Better to go slow and not trip up, than fast and wobbly.

Weatherill Maiden speech, is it? You’ll be fine.

Redditch (nervously crumpling his speech) Alright for you lot. As Whips you’re banned from speaking in the House, aren’t you?

Atkins From speaking anywhere, old boy; we don’t exist. You won’t hear our names called.

Redditch Christ, I hadn’t even expected to be here. I was only standing in Redditch ’cause I was told it was a no-hoper. They bloody well lied. Needles everywhere, you know that? Half the world’s needles, made in sodding . . .

Atkins (sighs at the board) Oh blast it all, I really did think we’d have them out by now.

Redditch I was holding out for Cheam, or Chester. A ‘ch’ place, a nice little English ‘ch’ place. Not ‘Redditch’, listen to that. It’s not a name, it’s a fucking noise. What is it, ‘Redditch’? Sounds like a frog vomiting.

Silvester You’re up, Hal.

Redditch (leaving) And they told me it was Worcestershire. Another lie!

Atkins It is Worcestershire.

Redditch Oh Humphrey, it’s Birmingham. Everybody knows it is, listen to the sodding accent. I imagined meadows and steeples and farmyards and haystacks. Well, do you know what, shall I tell you something? You can’t find a haystack in Redditch cause of all the fucking needles! (He exits.)

Silvester I can see why he’s so worked up, all that ceremonial stuff. I wish we could just do away with it. Modernise the place, make it more professional, less . . . less –

Atkins I sympathise, Fred, I do, but remember, we are gloriously unique, this country, in not having a written constitution. What we do have are traditions, gentlemen’s agreements. They help us to do what we do best. Muddle through.

Weatherill Only three in it, Chief. Block some of their big stuff, call a Confidence vote –

Atkins And how do we block them? Our lot will be bored and demoralised, it’s going to take all we’ve got to keep them coming in for every vote, all the time, and the other side seem to have successfully seduced the sods.

Weatherill (a touch tetchy?) I’m working on that, Chief.

Atkins You like that, Fred? Bit of alliteration – ‘Successfully – seducing – sods’.

Silvester Actually, I believe that’s assonance.

Weatherill and Atkins glower at him. He buckles.

Silvester Or, perhaps not.

Speaker The Member for Chelmsford!

Chelmsford (entering) Humphrey, Jack.

Atkins Norman, do come in; look we’ll get straight to it, you’re getting a call from Ted, he wants you round his table.

Chelmsford Oh? Oh, well, smashing.

Speaker Member for Plymouth Sutton!

Plymouth Sutton (knocking, entering) You rang, m’lords?

Weatherill Evening, Alan.

Plymouth Sutton (to Weatherill) Everything alright?

Atkins (to Chelmsford) It’s Education

Chelmsford . . . Education?

Plymouth Sutton (to Chelmsford) Oh well done, old cock.

Chelmsford Uh, thanks, Alan. I . . . I suppose I was interested in Foreign, / that’s all, but . . .

Plymouth Sutton (rubbing his hands) Right, well what have you got for me, then, eh?

Weatherill (to Plymouth Sutton, handing him a note) Complaint from the Serjeant at Arms.

Atkins Well, try and looked surprised and above all pleased, won’t you?

Plymouth Sutton (taking it) Complaint? What about?

Weatherill Apparently you now have three cars in the underground car park.

Plymouth Sutton Oh, come on.

Chelmsford All academic I suppose, anyway.

Weatherill Alan, there’s a good chap, three cars, all parked here?

Plymouth Sutton Well, the other Friday, I had a drink, didn’t I, for the, that thing, and got a taxi home. Which meant I had to drive in a new car on Monday.

Weatherill And the third car?

Plymouth Sutton Well, because I ruddy well had a drink last Friday, didn’t I, so I had to drive in with a different car this Monday! If anyone can think of a better way to get around, then –

Weatherill I see, so this will just keep happening until the car park becomes your showroom –

Atkins (scribbling down a note and handing it to him) If you insist on parking more that one vehicle I suggest you use the car park beneath Church House, that always has more space.

Plymouth Sutton Fine, I see, I’ll just leave the house five minutes earlier every morning in order that I can park farther away – wonderful!

Plymouth Sutton exits.

Atkins Norman, what did you mean just then. ‘All academic anyway’, what does that mean?

Chelmsford Well. You know. This is all assuming that Ted stays as leader, isn’t it?

Atkins (beat) Am I to gather that this is an assumption not everyone in the party is making?

Chelmsford Oh come on, don’t give me that, Humphrey, another election loss, wind knocked out of the party’s sails. Bound to be talk, isn’t there?

Atkins Is there?

Weatherill We have absolutely no interest in any rumours or heresay regarding the leadership, Norman. Perhaps if everyone were more focused on Labour instead, it wouldn’t be the Shadow cabinet you’d be stepping into.

Opens the door for him. Chelmsford leaves.

Weatherill Chief ?

Atkins Sod it, let’s head this off at the pass, shall we? Round up the usual suspects, let’s see what they know.

Weatherill Chief.

Atkins (at the door, quick beat) It wasn’t assonance, was it?

Weatherill No.

Atkins Good. (Exits.)

Weatherill It was sibilance. (Picks up his phone, and dials.)

Speaker The Member for Abingdon!

Cleaners’ cupboard. Atkins, Weatherill and Abingdon upturning buckets etc. to sit on.

Abingdon Really, we couldn’t we have gone for a walk around St James’s Park, like the old days? Wearing carnations, meeting on the bridge? ‘The seagulls fly south’, all that.

Atkins Who are you and Taunton trying to get to challenge Ted for the leadership? Someone from the Right. We’re guessing Leeds North East?

Abingdon Why, do you think he would win?

Atkins Yes.

Abingdon Huh. That’s not very loyal, is it?

Weatherill Airey, the Whips’ job isn’t to favour one man over the other, but it is to try and orchestrate a fair and bloodless conquest that won’t damage the party.

Abingdon You think I . . . ? Hah, come on, chaps, I don’t want to damage the Party, damage is being done to the Party, to the country. It’s time to wake up from this, this slow lurch to the Left that we’ve been sleepwalking into since the end of the war, no questions asked. This country is being kept alive on aspirin when what it needs is electric bloody shock therapy.

Weatherill Who. Are you putting up. To stand? Is it Leeds North East?

Abingdon (beat) Finchley.

Atkins (beat; smiles) Oh I see. ‘Finchley’, you sly dog. None of the big guns were brave enough to go over first so you’re sending in some cannon fodder to test the ground – a lamb to the slaughter.

Abingdon Lamb, don’t make me laugh, have you ever spent any time with her?

Atkins She’ll lose, but the challenge will weaken Ted enough to get the generals over safely, finish him off. Who?

Abingdon Lowestoft. Leeds North East. East Surrey. Perhaps Yeovil.

Atkins (writing them down) Right. Well. We’d better start canvassing opinion, hadn’t we?

Abingdon You’re not going to tell him, are you?

Atkins Well, wouldn’t you prefer to know you’re about to . . . (picking it up) kick the bucket?

Government Whips’ Office.

Mellish So we’ve got a bit of breathing space, might be able to start getting our bigger stuff through. (Handing out files.) Starting with a referendum on staying in or getting out of Europe, and then the big one. Scottish and Welsh devolution.

Harper Devolution? Try and pass something that big? Our members are unenthusiastic at best.

Mellish Well get ’em enthusiastic! We need to keep the odds and sods happy, don’t we? You’ve got your lists, charm ’em, make ’em feel loved.

Speaker The Member for Batley and Morley!

Batley (entering, frail) Evening, all.

Mellish Whey, it’s the Doc! We love the Doc. (Exits.)

Batley (at Taylor) Oh, hello young lady, alright?

Harrison Ann, this is Doc Broughton, member for Batley. Doc, this is Ann, Bolton.

Taylor Nice to meet you, Doc, how you keeping?

Batley Oh, fair to middling – well, actually, uh, Walter, that’s sort of what I was, uh . . . (More privately.) I’ve got a hospital, you know, thing, tomorrow and well . . . there’s a train back up leaving in twenty, I didn’t know whether I might, uh –

Harrison Doc, don’t you worry about it, get yourself gone, Channel Tunnel Bill’s home and bloody dry, we’ll pair you up. Ey, Joe?

Harper Ay, will do, Doc, I’m a dab hand now.

Harrison Can’t have you popping your clogs here, can we? After all, ‘Nobody / dies in the Palace’.

Batley ‘. . . dies in the Palace of Westminster’, ha ha, yeah.

Taylor What does that mean, ‘Nobody dies’?

Harrison Oh, it’s just this . . . a silly old rule; no one’s meant to snuff it here, even if they do they won’t be pronounced dead until they’re halfway across Westminster Bridge, or arrive at St Thomas’s. No one has ever died here. Technically. It’s just a thing.

Batley Ay, well, thing or not, I, uh . . . (More privately.) Well, ’nuther time ’nuther place, obviously, but if we could get round to have that little chat about . . . you know, me moving on this term.

Harrison Oh Doc, we just don’t want to see you go, that’s all.

Batley Oh, don’t play soft. Look, I held Batley for you in the election as promised, but now it looks like we’re home and dry, you know, numbers wise, I . . . well. Happen it’s time I hung up me boots, as it were. Seat’s as safe as houses, you’d hold it in a by-election, no trouble.

Harrison Doc, if that’s what you want, we’ll sort something out. I promise.

All leave except Cocks and Taylor.

Cocks Alright, Ann?

Taylor Yeah, fine. I think. I’m just not sure what I’m meant to be judging my performance by, except getting everyone on my list in when we need them.

Cocks And the job, the life? This place?

Taylor I’ve stood in front of a classroom and taught a pack of kids; it’s the same principle. It does take a bit of getting used to. Being away from home, Sunday to Thursday, week in, week out.

Cocks An empty London box room while your kids are growing up without you.

Taylor . . . Something like that. (Beat.) I shouldn’t wonder if people had an opinion of that. Me.

Cocks Let ’em. Course, harder for us, our side. As a rule we come from further away. Half of them lot live in London, anyway. I rememb – This is funny now, but I imagined it’d feel like being a rock star, when I started. Like being away on tour. But it’s . . . you know, not . . .

Taylor No wonder they all prop up the bars till the early hours. Nothing else to do. Nowhere else to go. How do you do it. Wife, family? Home?

Cocks . . . I don’t know, Ann.

Taylor (beat; looks at the board) ’S it enough to stay alive, then, d’you reckon? Three?

Cocks Yeah, technically. Just so long as it don’t go down.

Speaker The member for Walsall North!

In the Commons Chamber, Walsall North stands.

The Members’ Chorus sing a choral version of ‘Rock ’n’ Roll Suicide’ by David Bowie as Walsall North steps from the bench.

Sound of the sea. He lights a cigarette. Kicks off his shoes. Takes off his trousers.

Smokes. Unbuttons and takes off his shirt. Smokes. He walks . . . and disappears.

The Government Whips’ Office. Harrison wipes out ‘+3’ and replaces it with ‘+2’.

Mellish Just his clothes left. Strewn along on the bloody beach. Miami. Christ . . .

Cock And there . . . there was no, there was no like, body, or . . . or a note or – ?

Harrison Mad bugger. Should have known. We should have fuckin’ – sorry Ann – known.

Cocks Yeah, but, I mean, you say, you know, you say that but . . . ha, it’s, it’s, you, it . . .

Ann (with the book) Oh Jesus. His last question in the House. Remember? Drowning statistics.

Mellish Oh holy . . .

Harper Jesus.

Cocks He . . . he sa – I mean, what, what more could you do, just –

Mellish Nothing. Couldn’t do nothing, not our fault people of this country vote in friggin lunatics, is it? We just have to make sure we don’t bloody well lose any more of ’em, Christ. (Jacket on, making to go). Just two in it. Two! No more! (Exits, slamming the door.)

Opposition Whips’ Office. Atkins on the phone, Silvester, and Abingdon. Weatherill enters.

Speaker Member for Abingdon!

Atkins No, I understand, Ted. I can only apologise that our numbers were a bit off. Everything pointed towards you scraping through. (Listens.) Well. That’s very graceful of you. Ta-ta. (Phone down.) Well, there you go, Airey. (Handing him the results.) Looks like your stalking horse has ‘accidentally’ arrived home first. 130 to 119. Con-gra-tu-lations.

Abingdon takes the results, slightly agog.

Atkins Seems everyone thought everyone else would vote for Ted, so no harm in registering a little protest. Funny how things work out, eh?

Abingdon She’s going to surprise you. You know. I was, I mean I admit, that wasn’t what I’d . . . or any of us had . . . but. She’s going to surprise you.

Weatherill Well, then. (Grabbing his things.) I suppose we’d better go and pay her a visit.

Scene Four

The Lobby. Silvester facing Harper. Pairing books at the ready.

Harper A handful of our lot off ill for your Trade Union amendment, I’m afraid. Batley, again –

Silvester The Doc? Still?

Harper Emphysema. Leeds Hospital. Also St Helen’s, Glasgow Garscarden, and Thurrock.

Silvester Some might wonder why on earth we should be taking so many of our boys out.

Harper Yeah, they might. But they wouldn’t be people of honour, would they? Upholding an age-old tradition.

Silvester Yeah, alright, keep your braces on. One of our trickier customers has a boat show they’re trying to get to, that’ll bring him on side. Say, this stuff about Thorpe, eh? Didn’t come from your lot, did it? Young male lover.

Attempted assassination. All nonsense, of course. Must be.

Harper Before I came into politics, Frederick, I would have agreed with you.

The Division Bell rings. In the Lobby, the Teller climbs atop his stool as Members scuttle through the small shaft of light, one after the other, being counted.

Speaker The Question is, that Opposition Amendment No. 101 to the Trade Union and Labour Relations Bill be made.

Ayes to the right, 290. Noes to the left . . . 291! The Noes have it! The Noes have it!

Government Whips’ Office. Mellish hurls some papers across the room. Harper’s on the phone.

Mellish Woolwich West has snuffed it. Which takes it down to one! Bloody one in it. That’s it. The Tories can smell blood now, oh yes.

Harrison Odds and sods are restless, starting to ask what they’re getting in return for their support. It’s becoming harder to –

Mellish Yes, well, it’s about to get a whole lot fucking worse. Ann, shut that door. Joe, off that fucking phone, now please.

Harper Chief, I’m just –

Mellish (takes the receiver slams it down) Ann, sorry for all the fucking swearing.

Taylor It’s alright, Chief.

Mellish This don’t leave the room. Only Cabinet Secretary and me knows, right? (Sighs.) The PM. He’s going. Summertime.

Harper You what? No.

Mellish He never intended to see out a full term, and with Finchley bringing . . . well, a surprising amount of unity and energy to the Opposition . . . it feels like the right time.

Harper Or the worst possible time – Jesus!

Harrison He’s just old, Joe. We’re all just bloody old.

Mellish And now with Thorpe on the Liberal side facing arrest. Charge of attempted murder no less. That’s three new leaders in the space of months, which means our alliances are shaky at best.

Harper A three-way changeover in one Parliament? That ever happen before? –

Mellish What does that matter, it’s happening now. (Pointing at the board, ‘+1’.) And it doesn’t get more fragile than that, does it? If Paisley and Ayrshire follow through with their threat of jumping ship, regardless of our threats, we’re back to hung again.

Harper Huh. Has that ever happened before?

Mellish Joe, I’ll save you some time, just assume that, in this Parliament, all bets are off. First things first though, once it’s announced the PM’s going, we’re going to have to start canvassing our lot, see what the word is on a replacement. (Phone rings.) What? (Listens, beat . . . ) You’re having a laugh, don’t muck about. (Shock, puts the phone down.) They’ve found him . . .

Harrison What? Who?

Mellish Hah! He’s alive! Ha ha . . . he’s only a-bloody-well-live!

He runs to the board and replaces ‘+1’ with ‘+2’, laughing.

Speaker The Member for Walsall North!

Westminster Clock Tower – ‘Old Prison Cell’.

Walsall North sits, hands between his legs, looking weak. Cocks and Mellish.

Walsall North You look worse than I do. And I’m dead . . .

Hello Michael, nice to see you again. I’m sorry for the undue . . . everything. Where is this?

Mellish Just somewhere out the way, no prying eyes.

Cocks It’s the old prison cell, base of the Clock Tower.

Mellish A member’s not been locked in here for sixty years, thought we’d reinstate the tradition.

Cock What . . . what was it, John? Just. The business, or your –

Walsall North Oh, I suppose just everything really. I knew the police would catch up with the fraud. I was having these dreams, too, really . . . really quite . . . Oh, and I fell in love, of course.

Cocks With Sheila.

Walsall North Ye-es, she told me you’d been asking questions. Whoopsy-daisy, you.

Mellish We hear you’re looking at maybe six months. Not bad for . . . how many counts?

Walsall North Uh, twenty-one, I think. Yes, forgery, wasting police time, um, falsifying accounts . . . uh, oh, faking my own death, of course, that’s a big one. How is it, by-the-by? Good ol’ Walsall North? I suppose it’s not my problem now, is it?

Mellish You bet your bottom dollar it is, mate.

Walsall North Hmm? (Beat.) You’re not getting rid of me?

Mellish Oh, don’t think in any other situation you wouldn’t be out on your bloody bum, mate. But we can’t. Not yet.

Majority’s too thin. With a suspended sentence you can stay on till we’re out of the danger zone and then piss off.

Walsall North No. No, I’m not staying here, I can’t stay in the House. I’ll resign.

Mellish Can’t resign, John. Only get booted out. Fact.

Walsall North Oh yes I can. The Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds. ‘An MP who accepts an office of profit must resign.’ So there. I’m sorry. But . . .

Mellish (standing, grabbing him) You’re bloody well staying, right?! You’re staying here!

Walsall North (limply) Can’t you feel it?! Can’t you hear it . . . Listen! . . . it’s creaking. She’s moaning . . . it’s over. The whole thing is dying –

Mellish Enough of that, John, we know you were bullshitting the loony bastard stuff –

Walsall North How can you not feel it . . . it’s diseased . . . let it die. You have to let her die . . .

Government Whips’ Office. Harrison with Harper and Ann.

Mellish (entering) Arsehole. (Going to the board, replacing ‘+2’ with ‘+1’.) Walsall North’s going, we should assume we won’t keep the seat either. (Chucking the chalk.) Bollocks.

How’s the leadership looking, support?

Harrison Close call between Ebbw Vale and Cardiff, though reckon there’s more support for Bristol South East than folk are letting on.

Mellish Bristol? Jesus. See, this is what I’m talking about, divisive candidates, it’s the last –

Harrison Oi, and whatever happened to neutrality, Chief ?

Mellish I am bloody neutral, I’m just saying, I can see the road ahead, this rate, seen it before, no one does that self. . . what’s it, thing, better than Labour.

Ann ‘Self-’ what thing?

Mellish You know with the – (Imitates self-flagellation.) Where you hit yourself on the – it don’t matter. What time is it . . . ? Quarter to ten. Get off into the lobby, I’ll see you there.

The others leave as Mellish shuffles papers. Stops. Thinking . . .

He picks up his phone and dials a number, sitting at his desk.

Mellish Hello, it’s Bob. . . . Uh, I wondered if you were around at all later? Somewhere private. I, got some numbers. And I just kind of . . . well, wanted to pledge my own personal support.

Members’ Lobby. Weatherill passes Harrison.

Weatherill Oh, what’s up, Walter? ‘Trouble at mill’?

Harrison Nothing to worry your pretty little head over, Jack.

Weatherill Risky business this, change of leader, takes a crack team of Whips with the trust and respect of their members to achieve it calmly, smoothly.

Harrison Oi, don’t teach your gran to suck eggs, right?

Weatherill You can be smug all you want, Walter, all it means is you’re in power as the economy worsens and the blame can be on you. Not long now though until the profits from North Sea oil start pumping in, and we’ll take over just in time to spend it.

Harrison Poppycock.

Weatherill Alright, double the bet. Twenty?

Harrison Twenty, bugger off, fifty.

Weatherill Done.

The House of Commons Rifle Range.

Atkins fires a few shots at the targets and reloads. Weatherill behind him.

Weatherill They’re scared. Halfway across the tightrope and they’re having to change poles; it could go either way.

Atkins Good. So we just have to sit back and let them do what they do best. Tear themselves apart. It’s the best way to hunt, you know Jack-my-lad. Let the target come to you. (Fires. Reloads.) I don’t know why I’m not down here more often. Very relaxing.

Weatherill Careful. They’re trying to get rid of it. Sits incongruously inside a modern political establishment, apparently.

Atkins Huh. Really. (Aims.) I would have thought it entirely in keeping . . . (Fires.)

The Government Whips’ Office. Mellish and Cocks. Mellish is packing his things into a box.

Cocks I don’t . . . Bob, it doesn’t . . . I mean, Jesus. Why?

Mellish Backed the wrong horse, didn’t I? Ebbw Vale. You play your cards . . .

Cocks Why di – Why did you even back a horse? You always said we had to be –

Mellish Yeah and I’m right, you should be. I ju – I just wanted . . . oh, I dunno, Michael. I just got sick of this, being in the heart of the bloody kitchen, cleaning up the mess, doing all the . . . I just wanted a seat round that table. Maybe. As an equal, not the bloody whipping boy, one who makes ’em laugh with his, his . . . cheeky, cockney rhyming, bloody, docker’s son, fucking – sorry, Ann, oh, she’s . . . (not there.)

Cocks This is the most critical . . . I mean I’m not saying Walter’s not up to it, of course he is, but –

Mellish Not Walter. You.

Cocks (long pause) Me . . . ? But I’m . . . Bob, I’m not –

Mellish I know you’re not, that’s the point.

Harrison (bursting in) It’s not true, you’re not going, you’re not bloody going – ?

Mellish Walter, it’s fine –

Harrison Aw, what is this, no Bob, no, when we’re hanging by a thread?! How can he do– ?!

Mellish Walter, oi. He’s right to. You need your Whip to take a bloody bullet for you, and I stuck my neck out for the other guy. He needs someone he can trust. He needs . . . Michael.

Walter . . .

Mellish (to Cocks) Look, give us a minute, will yer?

Beat. Cocks exits.

Mellish Listen to me, Walter Harrison. You’re a bloody-minded Yorkshire bastard but I love yer, OK? And you’re the best Deputy Whip this building has ever bloody seen. And that’s why . . . that’s why you still will be the best Deputy . . .

Beat. Harrison sits, leans forward on his knees.

Mellish You’re the one that they’re either afraid of, or that they actually like and come to. The Chief can’t be those things. The Chief has to be above it all. And above it all, you’d be wasted. It’s your fault for being so sodding indispensible. Michael, he’s . . . he’s smart. He’s considered. Collects stamps, for fuck’s sake. We’ll need that level of patience, clear thinking, to navigate through this. But he’ll need help, Walter; someone to keep him cool, calm, you know what he can get like when he –

Taylor and Harper enter.

Taylor Bob?

Mellish Alright, it’s alright, look, let’s not make a song and dance about it.

Speaker The Member for South Ayrshire, the Member for Paisley!

Paisley and South Ayrshire bustle in, followed by Cocks hot on their heels.

Harper Oi, you two, I said wait outside!

Cocks Jim, John, / you can’t just come in here –

Paisley We’re sorry to barge in, Bob, but rumours are you’re off and we / need –

Mellish Bang on, old son, so out me way. Speak to Michael, there.

Harper Michael?

South Ayrshire Bob, we’ve come to formally resign the Whip. We can no longer in good conscience act as Members of Parliament for the Labour Party. I’m sorry.

Mellish waves them off with a free hand, turning and making to leave. Beat. Puts the box down and goes for the pair of them – yelling, the other Whips pulling him off.

Mellish You pair of disloyal bastards! I’ll have you! It’s over for you, I mean it!!

South Ayrshire Oh, don’t talk to me about loyalty, Bob! You hear?! Loyal, what’s loyal about giving the voters a promise on devolution and then not bloody well delivering?!

Taylor And how are we meant to deliver on something as big as dividing up the kingdom, Jim? (At the board.) With a majority that big?!

Paisley You’re not delivering on anything! On anything. This isn’t a government. Governments have powers, make decisions, rule. This isn’t a Parliament. It’s a fucking purgatory.

Paisley and South Ayrshire leave. Mellish tuts at his slightly torn shirt.

Mellish Pocket’s bloody . . .

Taylor Here, let me –

Mellish Leave it. Just . . .

Beat. Picks up his things. Walks towards the door. Stops.

Oh shit, my ca – Huh, I don’t have the, the car. Any more. It’s yours, Michael. I don’t . . . I can’t remember how I – hold on.

Cocks Bob, take the car, let it / drop you –

Mellish No, it’s fine, Christ, don’t make a . . . I just need to jog me – it’s the Circle, no District. District Line, Eastbound, from . . . see? I got it. It’s fine.

Don’t . . . don’t let ’em win. Alright? Halfway there. Don’t let the bastards win.

Mellish leaves. Silence. Cocks takes the chalk, and on the board replaces ‘+1’ with ‘–1’.

Harper . . . So. That’s it, then. Hung again.

Cocks No. That’s not it. (At the board.) We draw the odds and sods back over to us again, rainbow coalition, why not, we’ve done it before, we can do it again. We can. We . . . Walter can.

Harrison looks up.

Cocks Next vote is Aircraft and Shipbuilding Bill, a classic ideological one, we want to invest, Tories want to cut, if they beat us, they’ll call a No Confidence, which if we lose, we’re out, finished. If we win . . . well if we win, we fight another day. And another. All the way to five years. Together. (Beat. Holds out the chalk.) Walter . . . ?

Pause. Everyone looking at Harrison. He sighs . . . and stands, taking the chalk.

Harrison Alright, Chief. Let’s see what we’ve got.

Scene Five

From the dimly lit Commons Chamber, the Members’ Chorus are singing ‘The Red Flag’. A flash of light picks up the Member for Henley on the floor, facing them, back to us, brandishing the Parliamentary Mace above his head maniacally as the music explodes –

The Government Whips’ Office and the Opposition Whips’ Office. An eruption of activity as Cocks, Harrison, Harper and Taylor bundle Stirlingshire West into the Government office, holding a bloody nose, and in the Opposition office a mirror image, Atkins, Weatherill, Silvester and Esher help in the Member for Hexham, staunching his own bloody nose.

Esher Cheats! Bunch of double crossers! Can you believe it?! They broke a pair!

Hexham Ouch. It hurts. Everything on my face hurts.

The Speaker and Serjeant at Arms bowl in with Henley and Lowestoft.

Henley (shouting to members, outside) Yeah! Come on then! Bloody try it!

Speaker (trying to get above the din) Gentlemen, please! Try to act like Honourable Members of this House! And not football hooligans! I’ve already suspended the session for twenty minutes so that everyone can calm down. I’ve Commons policemen pulling people apart in the lobby and fighting, fighting, in the House of Commons Chamber! I have never in my life –

Henley That song, they were singing that bloody Commie song after they robbed us of the vote!

Weatherill Heseltine, put a sock in it!

Speaker I don’t care about the bloody vote! I do care about you removing the Parliamentary Mace from its sacred position and using it to threaten ministers!

Atkins Mr Speaker, they broke a pair, they must have done, they paired someone with one of our guys and then they brought him into the lobby for their vote!

Esher Cheats! Cheaters!

Speaker That Mace dates back to Charles II –

Henley I know, look, I –

Speaker – and symbolises – are you listening? – the royal authority under which the Commons sits. Interfering with it constitutes gross misconduct, the Serjeant at Arms, here, has the authority to take you to the cells / and imprison you –

Serjeant Only I am allowed to / place and remove that Mace, do you understand? Me.

Lowestoft Wow, wow, wow. Look.

Henley Alright! I’ll apologise!

Weatherill I’m going over there to sort this out. (Exiting.)

Speaker The House can’t reconvene for business until the Mace is placed back properly, and you put it back the wrong way round.

Lowestoft Oh, don’t – what?!

Speaker Parliament is not authorised to lawfully meet unless the Mace is in place, and you put it back the wrong way round!

Atkins Both of you, both of you, go with the Serjeant of Arms and replace the Mace.

Lowestoft Oh for GOD’S – !

He exits with Henley and Serjeant.

Government Whips’ Office.

Taylor Denis, are you alright?

Stirlingshire West Ponces, couldn’t, couldn’t throw a decent punch if – ow.

Cocks Alright, Joe, talk. Did we slip someone back in who was meant to be paired off ?

Harrison No, we agreed on six pairs and we gave them six pairs –

Harper It’s the Agriculture Minister, Chief. After the first vote tied, when we found out that Agriculture was delayed in Denmark and / hadn’t told us –

Harrison Hadn’t told us, exactly, which meant we actually had seven, seven off, and them lot had only asked for six, so we brought one of the others back in and it took our numbers up by one. We can’t help that, can we? But hey presto, done. We won.

Cocks That’s not . . . what –

Weatherill (bursting in) Michael, Walter, someone explain where your extra man came from.

Cocks Oi, this is the Government Whips’ Office, did you knock? / Go out and knock!

Weatherill Who was the Member that took your tally up from / 303 to 304?

Cocks Did you knock on that door?! Did you knock on the door?!

Weatherill All right! Knock, blimey, I’ll knock, bloody . . .

He exits, closing the door. Speaker knocks on the door.

Harrison Who is it?

Weatherill (bursting back in) God damn it, Walter!

Harrison (laughing) All right, sorry. Oi, you bugger. I’m sorry, right? We can sort this out.

Weatherill This is serious, this is really serious. Understand? The vote on our amendment was tied, 303 each, do we agree on that?

Harrison Jack –

Weatherill Then on the following division, the vote on your bill, the numbers were different. It was us, 303, and you, 3–0– 4. Which means someone who hadn’t been there at the first division was there for the second, now how can that be?

Harrison The Agriculture Minister, Jack. He’s in Denmark, right, and he wasn’t paired.

Weatherill Wasn’t pai – ? Well, had you asked for a pair, did you ask Fred for one?

Harper It was you lot, you asked for six pairs, and we gave you six –

Atkins, Silvester and Esher storm in with Speaker who has a thick book.

Atkins COCKS! I demand to / know what you did!

Cocks Uh, excuse me, all of you, / out of this office!

Weatherill Fred, the Agriculture Minister was away, did you pair him?

Silvester What? No, he wasn’t one of them, it was –

Atkins Oh, really!

Harrison Wait, just bloody listen. Jesus! We agreed pairs; six of ours for six of yours. But with Agriculture not getting back in time, we realised we actually had seven away. So even if I did chuck our member for Stalybridge and Hyde back in –

Silvester Pendry? But / he was paired –

Harrison – we still had six of our lot sitting out, as agreed!

Harper If we’d known Agriculture was away earlier, we’d have had Pendry in on the first vote an’ all. Fair and square!

Esher Cheats! Liars!

Harper Oh knock it off!

Weatherill No, that’s it then! That extra vote of your chap who went in is void, / it’s void.

Atkins Mr Speaker, I demand, demand you void that extra vote and declare it tied –

Cocks Hold up, it isn’t tied, we won! The Bill will become law, get over it –

Speaker Wait, wait, look, according to all precedents, yes, in a tied vote, as Speaker I’d have to vote against the motion, but –

Taylor It isn’t tied! We won, by one! (Exits.)

Speaker BUT! Cocks is right, there’s nothing in the Erskine May rules that recognises pairing. That’s a gentlemen’s agreement between yourselves, I can’t call a recount.

Atkins Oh, you – that’s it, you, you . . . bastards! You’ve BLOODY HAD IT!

Speaker And I’m suspending the House for the night, so you can all / go home!

Weatherill Walter, Michael, I can’t / believe this –

Harper Why is it so hard for you to understand? You agreed six pairs and you got six pairs!

Atkins You think this is dirty? You wait. Just you wait. No – More – Pairing!

Harrison Oh don’t talk rubbish, Humphrey, you can’t just / stop –

Atkins I MEAN IT! It’s over. Pairing is off. Finished. Forget it! And The Usual Channels are closed!

He exits with the other Opposition Whips.

Taylor (re-entering) Chief, there’s uproar amongst the odds and sods, The Liberals, Welsh . . . all of them saying they won’t be voting with us again. They ‘can’t be associated with cheats’.

Cocks Oh brilliant, so . . . (At the board, tapping away.) All the odds and sods gone, and we can’t pair, with our lot, if we can’t pair – ! Fuck it!

Cocks hurls his papers across the room and exits, followed by Harper. Silence.

Taylor Walter, you need to go see Atkins now, repair the damage.

Harrison Oh ‘I need to’, is it? ‘I bloody need’?! . . . Sorry.

Taylor What, can’t take it from someone with boobs and no bollocks?

Harrison Oh fuck off, giving me that. Got bigger bollocks than anyone else here, Ann.

Taylor Because I tell you something, if there’d been more of us in there, there wouldn’t have been scenes like that tonight. We’d . . . we’d knock your bloody heads together.

Harrison (beat) Look, give . . . give me a sec.

Taylor leaves. Harrison takes another glass and pours in a whisky. His hand shakes as he downs it, spilling some. He places it down, wipes his mouth and exits into:

Westminster Hall. Weatherill is pacing through, Harrison catches him up.

Weatherill Look, forget it, Walter, there’s nothing I can do!

Harrison I just want to talk about this – ! Would you hold on a second! Christ, it’s nothing that you wouldn’t do or haven’t done –

Weatherill (stops, turning) That I would do?! You cheated. Walter. I don’t care about the technical ‘this and that’. You bloody cheated. (Beat, studying him.) Hah . . . my God, look at you. You’re actually scared. ‘Walter Harrison’. We’ve got you, haven’t we . . . ?

Harrison It is a centuries’ old system, you can’t just stop pairing, you don’t have the right –

Weatherill Oh ‘centuries’ old’, ‘thousand years old’, ‘you can’t do this’, ‘must do that’. (Sighs. Looks up. Around.) Westminster Hall. Oldest part of Parliament. The stuff those rafters have seen, eh?

Right over there? It’s where they set up the trial for the execution of Charles I. God’s ‘representative’ on Earth. God. ‘For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory . . . ’

But we said from now on . . . we would rule ourselves. And off went his head . . .

‘We can do it better,’ they said. Hah. Well, sometimes . . . I’m sorry, Walter. No more cooperation, the Usual Channels are closed. And No More Pairing.

Harrison Jack –

Weatherill No, Walter! That’s it! You want help with your sick and your dying, forget it. You’ll have to get them into the lobby your bloody self from now on. And the Best of British to you.

The chimes of Big Ben sound. Harrison looks up, towards them . . .

The Westminster Clock Tower.

Cocks stands looking through the panels of the Clock. The bells sound around him, the hands moving around the face. Suddenly, the bells stop, and the hands slow to a clunking stop.

Beat. Cocks looks up at them . . .

Blackout.





Act Two

Scene One

In the Commons’ Chamber.

A new Speaker replaces the old one in the chair – who returns now to the Members’ Chorus.

Speaker Order. ORDER! We are now in session.

The Westminster Clock Tower.

Cocks with the Clockmaker. The giant clock face is under repair, the hands stationary.

Cocks Come on, you must have an idea. How long we talking?

Clockmaker Well, it’s never happened before has it? As far as we know, there aren’t even any drawings or plans to fix the bloody thing.

Cocks What was it?

Clockmaker The speed regulator. Torsional fatigue, been going for over a hundred years, gave up the ghost. Be summer, earliest,

I reckon.

Cocks Sum – ! Oh, please tell me it’ll be up and running for the Jubilee.

Clockmaker It’s a clock, Mr Cocks. They break. What’s it matter?

Cocks What’s it . . . ?! Ha ha, yes, no you’re right, not important, eh, it’s not a, a, symbol of anything, doesn’t mean anything, only carried on ticking through all the bloody, all the great wars, the biggest crises, any time our backs were against the wall, oh yeah. And you’re telling me now for no reason it’s just stopped ?

Clockmaker It’ll just take time, Mr Cocks.

Cocks Ha. Right. Yes. (Looking at the face.) The one thing we no longer have.

Speaker The Member for Batley and Morley!

Government Whips’ Office. Batley and Lady Batley arrive with Harrison, bringing with them a portable oxygen tank.

Harrison I’m sorry it’s come to this. But they aren’t pairing still, so I’m afraid it’s all members, all the time, no exception.

Lady Batley (applying his mask) Oh you’re preaching to the converted here, Walter. He’d crawl through the lobby dead if he had to. I’m the one trying to hold him back.

Harrison We’ve turned the Member for Greenock’s office into a makeshift bedroom for you, yours was too tiny.

Batley Oh God, what a pain in the – hate being such an awkward bugger –

Harrison Oi, he didn’t mind swapping, it’s no bother.

Lady Batley Well at least we don’t have to worry about toing and froing for a while, eh? Gosh, kipping in the House of Commons. We’ll make it cosy, eh? Though no funny business, Doctor Broughton.

She touches his face, softly. A moment between them.

Harrison Alright, Burton and Taylor, knock it off. (Gathering their things.) First bill tonight is about 10.15.

Harper Doc, you won’t even have to walk into the lobby, as long as you’re in the grounds, I’ll come up with one of the aristotwats to ‘nod you through’.

Lady Batley (on the way out) Eh, this Big Ben business is causing a bit of a ding-dong, isn’t it? Ooh, hah. ‘Ding-dong’. (Laughs.)

Batley Ooh, don’t make me laugh. (Coughing. Air.) Dear me.

Harrison Nah, press are having a right old time with it, good distraction if you ask me.

Batley Radio . . . (Air.) Radio Four not quite the same, though, all pips and no bongs.

Harrison Oi, don’t try and fool anyone you listen to Radio Four, Doc.

Batley Oi, where . . . (Gasps of air.) Where do we order room service?

Harrison Up my bloody arse.

They exit with Harper as Cocks enters.

Cocks Right, Defence Secretary, the member for Mansfield, he’s stuck in Ireland and the next flight isn’t for over an hour so I’ve spoken to the PM, the RAF will lay on a jet.

Taylor (phone down) No, Hunter Jet’s off, but the RAF can strap on an extra fuel tank to a helicopter at the base fourteen miles from the minister, that might get him here, just.

Cocks Ann, get on the phone to the Ulster constabulary, I want all the traffic lights fixed in his favour to get him to the base, no reds, all green.

Harrison (looking at his watch) It’s gonna be close, and them lot over there won’t be happy.

Cocks Tough. Every vote counts.

Harrison Every vote counts.

Members’ Lobby. Harrison bumps into Weatherill.

Harrison Oh, evening, Mr Weatherill, alright your end is it, all OK? We’ll have every single one of ours in once again, tonight.

Weatherill By hook or by crook, I take it.

Harrison Proved we can though, eh? Against the odds.

Weatherill Pride commeth before the fall, Walter.

Harrison And fifty nicker commeth my way, presently. Three years down, mate, two to go.

Speaker The Member for Liverpool Edge Hill!

Government Whips’ Office. Hive of activity, Cocks, Harrison, Taylor and Harper sitting, Liverpool Edge Hill down and helping him staunch a minor blood flow through his shirt.

Harper You’ll be fine, don’t you worry. ’Ere, sit.

Liverpool Edge Hill I know, it ju – ow, it just stings a bit.

Cocks We really appreciate it, obviously, this won’t be forgotten.

Liverpool Edge Hill The doctor really did think I should have stayed another night, you know, Michael. I mean, removing an appendix, it’s not like taking your shoes off –

Speaker The Member for Welwyn and Hatfield!

Welwyn and Hatfield enters, holding a baby, crying loudly, followed by the Serjeant at Arms. The lobby buzzing outside.

Serjeant Chief Whip, we have a bit of a problem.

Welwyn and Hatfield No, there’s no problem. Michael? –

Harrison Oi, oi, oi, Helene please, what the bloody hell, bringing / a crying baby in here.

Serjeant I’m afraid we’ve had a complaint.

Taylor Complaint? Who from, what?

Welwyn and Hatfield Shush, / it’s alright, Freddie, there there.

Serjeant The Honourable Member, here, was seen engaging in . . . in – / she was reportedly –

Welwyn and Hatfield Oh for God’s sake, just say it, half the country have them. Breasts!

Serjeant . . . breast-feeding in the Lady Members’ Room, to the consternation of other female Members who observed the said event taking place –

Taylor Well, it’s alright, flippin’ ’eck, just do it in here.

Harper Here?! Get your . . . in the / Whips’ Office?

Serjeant It is against Palace rules to allow, you know, to ‘expose’ oneself in, in –

Welwyn and Hatfield Oh, for the love of –

Taylor Michael?

Michael Yeah, just –

Serjeant – in that manner, and to permit non-members into the Chamber during a sitting. And that baby is not a member!

Welwyn and Hatfield Oh but please, he’s got such good grasp of fiscal policy.

Serjeant This is, it, look, no other mother has ever had recourse to bring her child, a, a baby / into Parliament, so I don’t –

Welwyn and Hatfield Well, I’m doing it now, sod it, sod it! Michael, if you can’t slip me out as a pair then I’m slipping these out as a pair; here and now, there’s no choice. You tell me what else I’m meant to do, eh? Barely a week out of hospital, and –

Serjeant I will have to report this to the Commons Services Committee.

Welwyn and Hatfield So bloody well report me, do it.

I mean it, Michael. Walter. I need to attend to my baby, so am I staying and doing my job, or am I going home?

Serjeant I’m going to have to go and tell them something.

Cocks Serjeant.

Serjeant What?

Cocks Tell ’em she’s getting her tits out in here and they can all fuck off.

Beat. Serjeant frowns. Exits in a crap huff.

Welwyn and Hatfield (beginning to undo blouse) . . . Thank you.

Taylor Blimey, you lot. Babies in the Whips’ Office now, talk about sacred cows.

Cocks Ay, well, once the first hole appears in the dam . . .

Harrison (surveying the scene) Jesus, would you look at it; Whips’ Office has turned into a casualty come daycare centre. You alright there, Arthur?

Liverpool Edge Hill is staring at Welwyn and Hatfield breastfeeding.

Cocks / Harrison Arthur.

Liverpool Edge Hill Hmm? Oh no, yes, it’s fine, nothing to, erm . . .

Taylor Might get a blue plaque, Helene. ‘Welwyn and Hatfield, at this spot. First to breast-feed in Westminster.’

Welwyn and Hatfield I don’t want a plaque, I don’t want anything I’m not . . . I’m not a flippin’ martyr, I’m not flying any flags. I don’t want to be here, I want to be at home –

Cocks I know, Helene, I’m sorry, we’re trying, they’re not budging, they’re –

Welwyn and Hatfield Well, something has to give, there’ll have to be system, a place where –

Cocks You’re right. We’ll sort something.

Taylor Bloody hell, you can turn around, Joe! It’s only nature, you’re a father yourself!

Harper Yes, but I didn’t do that bit, did I?!

Cocks Joe, it’s quarter to ten, go get the nodding-through done with the aristo-twats. Ann, help Arthur into the Chamber. Walter, get flushing.

Speaker The member for St Helens!

New Palace Yard. St Helens is wheeled in by a Paramedic to Harper and Silvester.

Harper Ah, there he is, Fred, see. The member for St Helens in the Palace grounds. (Taps Silvester’s notebook.) You have to nod him through.

Paramedic Our staff are not best pleased about this, gents. To put it mildly.

Silvester Well, hold on, I don’t mean to be . . . but . . . (Waving his hand.) ‘Hello’? Is he even alive?

Harper Doesn’t matter, Fred, there’s the bell, and he’s here. ‘And Nobody Dies in the Palace of Westminster’. Ha ha. (Looks up; the sound of an approaching helicopter.) He’s made it . . .

Silvester What? No, I don’t believe it.

Harper Mansfield. He’s here. He’s bloody well made it . . . ! (They run off.) He’s here!

Toilets.

Speaker The Member for Batley and Morley!

Harrison bounds in and looks under the cubicle door – two feet dangle under one. He enters the cubicle next door and stands on the lid, peering in. Beat.

Harrison Doc? (Beat. Scrambles down.) DOC! Hold on, don’t worry . . .

Harrison takes out his screwdriver, working at the hinges. He gets the door loose and lifts it off. Batley inside, is sitting on the toilet looking weak. Harrison hoists him up.

Harrison Doc?! What you doing, where’s the missus? Just hold on, we’ll get you to hospital.

Batley No, the . . . lobby. Get me to the lobby.

Harrison Don’t be daft, man! Fuck it, and you’ve been nodded through, haven’t you?

Batley No, I’ve . . . been in here, they . . . they di –

Harrison Forget it, we’re going to the hospital –

Batley (finding the strength to shout) Just get me into that bastard lobby!

Chamber.

Speaker The Question is, that the Dock Work Regulation Bill be now read a second time!

Atkins Bit thin on the ground your side, wouldn’t you say Michael? Looks like this one’s ours.

The Speaker announces the various Labour members who enter, or are helped into, the Chamber, to cheers from the Government benches and consternation from the Opposition.

Speaker The member for Liverpool Edge Hill . . . The member for Welwyn and Hatfield . . .

The member for Batley and Morley . . . The member for Mansfield!

A vote takes place.

Speaker Ayes to the right . . . 310. Noes to the left . . . 308! The Ayes have it. The Ayes have it!

Harper Whey-hey, turns out Belfast is actually just north of Watford.

Weatherill Using the resources of the armed forces? For party political reasons?

Taylor Oi, he’s preserving his elected right to vote on legislation.

Government Whips’ Office.

Cocks, Harrison, Taylor and Harper clinking drinks (Cocks on water).

Harrison Whey! Well then. (Drink). ‘Nuther day, eh? Not drinking, Chief?

Cocks . . . Uh no, ta, Walter.

Harrison (drinks) Right. I’ll just go and tuck the Doc in. (Noticing . . . ) Oh. Ann. (Picks an eyelash from her cheek.) Eyelash. Make a wish.

She smiles and closes her eyes, blowing the lash from Harrison’s finger.

Harrison exits into the other office. Cocks heads out with letters.

Taylor and Harper . . .

Taylor Joe, while we’ve got a sec. It’s a bit, it’s slightly awkward.

Harper Oh yeah.

Taylor I’m in receipt of some information about a member and I don’t know what to do.

Harper Which member?

Taylor You. Joe (Beat.) Medical. Heard you’ve cancelled an operation twice now, a big one.

Harper How did . . . ? It’s nowt, Ann, don’t worry. Nowt serious, it’s more important I’m here –

Taylor You’re allowed to be sick, you know –

Harper Oi, 100 per cent voting record me, every time that bell rings, I’ve been in, and will be in.

Taylor You’ve nothing to prove, you know.

Harper I know tha – Oi, bloody ’ell, what you say that for? I’m not . . . Look, just keep it to your –

Cocks (re-entering) Come on, you pair, must have homes to go to.

He gets to work at his desk. Harper grabs his coat, studying Taylor, and leaves.

Cocks What did you wish for? Walter, just then.

Taylor Promise you won’t laugh? . . . To be where you are one day. First woman Chief.

Cocks Oh well, you’ve buggered it now, don’t come true if you say it aloud.

Taylor (smiles, beat) Michael? Would you mind not apologising for swearing around me. I know it’s a running joke, but I’m trying to fit in as one of the lads, and it, just . . . you know –

Cocks Oh, look, Ann, I’m sorry, it’s not . . .

Sighs. Stands, aware of Harrison next door.

’S just, I’m trying to, I’m trying to run a different kind of ship, and . . . and well, truth be told, I don’t want you to be like the lads, I want the lads to be more like you. We need to get more . . . It, look, this is the biggest fight any of us will have ever had, and it’s going to get harder. Our enemies are slick and strong and . . . it’s like the professionals versus the ‘lads from the comp’.

Taylor Well, grammar school boy, you, weren’t you?

Cocks You know what I mean. Come on, look at us. Walter? Left school, no qualifications, an electrician by trade. Joe, miner all his life. Me . . . well, me, I’m the dumbest of the lot. I just want us ready.

Taylor We will be. We are.

Taylor leaves. Beat. Harrison comes out the office, pouring himself another whisky.

Harrison Right, that’s done. Ta, Chief. (Collapsing.) I. Am.

Bollocksed.

Cocks Walt? How . . . how did you find out about the election before anyone else? How do you find out about everything?

Thorpe. Harold. Jim.

Harrison Lots of ways. Many fingers, many pies –

Cocks Name one. One pie.

Long pause.

Harrison The drivers. Ministers are stupid, once they’re in the back of a car with each other, reckon they’re in an airtight vacuum, well, they’re not. One thing drivers like more than an earwig is a gossip. Meet down the Anchor and Hope of a Sunday, I pop along.

Cocks You sly old dog.

Harrison Woof.

Cocks Is the Doc OK? Any news?

Harrison Yeah, he’ll . . . oh, I don’t know. He shouldn’t be here. A lot of them shouldn’t be here. It in’t fair.

Cocks I know –

Harrison They’re doing it ’cause they’re good men and they’re loyal, but we shouldn’t be having to ask ’em. I mean, I wanna keep going as much as anyone, more, but . . . how far do we go? Have to draw the line somewhere, Michael.

Cocks Yeah, well, when we get there, we’ll draw it. But for now, we plough on. (Beat.) D’you ever think . . . I don’t know.

Walsall North. All his talk about this place. It being like . . . you don’t think there were owt –

Harrison Course not. What you on about?

Cocks (beat; waves it off) Nothing.

Harrison downs his drink.

Harrison Right. Sure you’re staying? Missus not mind?

Cocks No. No, missus not mind.

Harrison Everything alright in that regard? Missus. Family.

Cocks You asking me as a Whip or a friend, Walter?

Harrison What do you think?

Cocks I don’t know. One of them grey areas, in’t it? . . . Yes, Walter. All fine in that regard, ta.

Harrison (beat) Eh. (Raises his glass.) Three years.

Cocks (raises his glass) Three years.

Scene Two

Opposition Whips’ Office.

Atkins The Lady is not happy.

Weatherill Oh dear – Fred, work through those, would you?

Atkins She can’t really understand why they’re still alive, over there. A minority in the House again and with the absence of pairing. And yet no huge defeats; even, can you believe, some victories. It’s like a game of ping pong, we win by one, they win by one, lose by two, we lose by two, nothing that rocks the boat enough to call for No Confidence.

Weatherill To be fair, they’ve defied all expectations and are actually getting their chaps in.

Silvester Not even ‘in’, technically, they’re arriving in taxis and ambulances and being nodded through from New Palace Yard. Can’t we put a stop to nodding through? We did to pairing.

Atkins No, if they’re infirm and within the grounds they’re entitled to the nod, we have to honour that. What the Lady wants is more aggression, determination. And with that, some new blood to the Whips’ Office.

Silvester Really? Some young blood?

Esher (enters, calling in) I’ve intercepted the Chelmsford chap, he’s awaiting orders, sah!

Atkins Thank you, let him in, would you?

Mather Right away, sah! (Exiting.)

Atkins I didn’t say young, I said new.

Silvester Oh God.

Speaker The Member for Chelmsford!

Chelmsford enters.

Atkins Norman, mum’s the word, but you’ll be getting a call, Shadow Cabinet, another move.

Chelmsford Oh right, smashing. (Rubs hands.) Lovely, I knew I could rely on her.

Atkins Shadow Arts.

Chelmsford . . . Hmm, come again?

Weatherill You had hinted you wanted a move.

Chelmsford Yeah, up! Not down!

Weatherill But you love the theatre, museums, you’re our biggest patron of the lot.

Chelmsford Yes, but – oh hell! Shad – ? That doesn’t even sound like a position. Makes me out to be a sodding, bloody wizard – the ‘Shadow Arts’.

Atkins Come on, Norman, you know how it works; they’re like snakes and ladders, reshuffles. Like a box step; you know what a box step is, don’t – well, ha, you will soon. If one first takes a step forward, cha-cha-cha, one then has to take a step to the back, cha-cha-cha. Now be a good chap, look surprised when you get the call.

Chelmsford sighs, and exits.

Atkins The rest of us, remember. Aggression, and determination.

Tea Room.

Taylor with Coventry South West. A spectacled Geordie lady. Outwardly meek.

Coventry South West Isn’t it funny how the Prime Minister of a country can just change like that, without an election.

Strange if you ask me. Shame we didn’t get the one we wanted. (At her cup.) Gosh, look at these. Not from a bring and buy, are they, wonder who’s paid for them.

Taylor So this is just a little feedback, just some observations and thoughts from your performances in the House.

Coventry South West Feedback? Who from?

Taylor Well, us, the Whips.

Coventry South West Why? Sorry, I’m not being rude dear, I just don’t understand.

Taylor Just on behalf of the Party, some support.

Coventry South West The Party? Oh, well, you know. I just say what I think, that’s all.

Taylor We certainly admire your ability to speak your mind. Specially in a boys’ club like this.

Coventry South West Doesn’t bother me, dear, got two of ’em at home.

Taylor Obviously we’ve noticed some of your abstentions on key votes. And then . . . well, then some votes against us, which is difficult, being in a minority anyway.

Coventry South West Yes, sorry about that, they just weren’t quite up my street.

Taylor Well. We all have to compromise occasionally, for the Party, and the greater good.

Coventry South West Oh. Do we? I just vote the way I think best.

Taylor Yes, and you seem to be able to take others with you, some of the younger, newer members. I have to say, your manner of speech-making is very, erm, very ‘persuasive’.

Coventry South West Oh, ta very much. Yes, I developed this little thing on the picket lines, you know, going up at the end of my sentences. Seems to go down well, gets people going.

‘We must fight to beat those who tread on the working PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY, DENYING THEM THE RIGHT TO A DECENT . . .

(Breaking off.) You know, that sort of thing. (Sips her tea.)

Taylor Yes, well I don’t mean to lay down the law. But we must be on the lookout for rebels.

Coventry South West Oh yes, of course you must, pet. I know all about rebels. I’m not long back from Portugal, you know, over the summer. We managed to bring down the junta.

Taylor ‘Managed . . . ’? Come off it, the revolution?

Coventry South West Well it was either that or the Lakes, dear. (Lifts her tea, smiling.)

Committee Room. Hubbub – Harrison and Cocks, Atkins and Weatherill and the Serjeant at Arms in heated debate as the Speaker arrives.

Speaker Alright, gentlemen please! What’s the matter?

Atkins They’re at it again, Mr Speaker, ‘bending the rules’ to say the bloody least –

Harrison Bending . . . ? The only thing bent is my leg, after your / man closed the bloody . . .

Serjeant Please. Mr Speaker, there’s been a difference of opinion regarding the votes on two bills at committee stage. Amendments to the Education Bill were being voted on in Committee Room 10, while amendments to the Finance Bill were being voted on in Committee Room 14. Mr Harrison here had been the pre-selected Whip present at both committees –

Harrison Yes, right, I voted in 14 and then I ran down the corridor to 10 to vote there and –

Serjeant Just as / I was closing the door.

Atkins Just as the doors were being closed, and locked, as is the custom –

Weatherill As is the law. Committee room doors must be closed and locked during a vote and –

Atkins And he didn’t make it –

Harrison And I did bloody make it!

Serjeant A sizeable chunk of Mr Harrison did make it, Mr Speaker.

Cocks / Harrison See.

Speaker Si – a ‘sizeable’ chunk, you say? Which chunk?

Harrison My whole body, both arms, and my left leg, but my right leg got caught in the door as he was closing it. / Look, I’ve got a bruise and everything –

Atkins And then he wouldn’t leave so that the doors could be closed –

Harrison Because I’d made it into the room. Look at that, see, purple, like a peach. Ouch.

Speaker What was the vote without Mr Harrison?

Cocks / Serjeant 22 to 22.

Speaker Serjeant, would you say that the overwhelming majority of Mr Harrison was inside the committee room?

Serjeant Well. Uh, yes, I suppose I would, Mr Speaker.

Speaker Very well, I declare the vote for the government, 22 to 22 and three quarters.

Cocks / Harrison Haha!

Atkins / Weatherill 22 and three quarters?!

Speaker I have spoken, chalk it up. (Sighs.) I look forward to seeing that one in the history books. (Exits.)

Atkins Oh really, you two, passing legislation by three quarters of a person now, that really is the living end.

Cocks Oh bugger off, Humphrey, you deliberately timed the votes for Walter to miss one. We beat you, that’s the end of it, so sucks boo to you. (Blows a raspberry, exiting.)

Atkins Oh, and a raspberry as well – we really are in the playground, aren’t we? (Exiting.)

Harrison (to Weatherill) Well. That’s another first, any road.

Weatherill (beat; smiles as he turns to leave) Well done, Walter. Nicely played.

Opposition Whips’ Office. Atkins, Weatherill, Silvester and Esher sitting in a circle.

Atkins Alright. New tactic. This has become a war of attrition; both sides dug into their trenches, neither making headway. To our credit, they’re exhausted. After late-night debates we have no appointments until business begins at 2.30 p.m. the next day, but Government ministers have to be in their departments first thing, so, it’s time to employ the age-old tactic of, quite simply, Wearing Them Out.

Weatherill We’ve crafted a rota of our chaps who will come in for what is essentially ‘nightshift work’, making long speeches, asking an interminable amount of questions. They’ll have to hold their members back in case we call a vote, which we’ll never do, thus getting their members furious at their own Whips for the incorrigible hours.

Silvester So it’s basic Somme tactics then, yes? We keep them on their toes for a charge that never comes, until they’re completely caught off guard when the big push does happen.

Esher It’s stamina, what? Everything is won on stamina, who can last the longest before raising the flag. Saw it in the eyes of the chaps I fought with in the war. Prisoners of war. Everything in their mind, body, focused on getting through each day at a time.

Silvester Really? God, I had no idea. Prisoner of . . . of which war?

Esher Which war, what do you mean which war? The war.

Silvester Yes, I know, sorry, I just, I wondered, you know . . . First, Second, Korean, Suez –

Esher Please do not list them as though they were flavours of ice cream. (Pause.) Which war, it was the war, where every sunrise was assumed to be one’s last, where there were moments I believed I would not live and where there were moments, I believe, I did not want to. You ask me which war, sir, it was the war. Sir.

And don’t slouch. Right, brandy, I think, before the bugle sounds. (Exits.)

Silvester Why on earth did I say ‘which war’? Father died in the bloody . . . (Sighs.) I can’t believe I still haven’t got the, the hang, of getting on side with men from . . . like that, from –

Weatherill You will.

Silvester It’s not my fault that I’m young. I can’t help it that I currently find myself being young.

Weatherill No, it isn’t. (Holding him a file.) But what a lovely problem to have.

The Commons Chamber.

The Members sing a choral version of ‘Five Years’ by David Bowie. As they’re announced, those named stand . . . and die.

Speaker The Member for Thurrock! . . . The Member for Ilford North!

Thurrock trips and tumbles through the air; Ilford North struggles to take in air through a mask (other members help in creating these effects).

Parliamentary Archive. Victoria Tower.

Harrison shows Weatherill in.

Weatherill The Archives? Hell’s teeth, Walter, I’ve got to be down in the Chamber in –

Harrison Look, just wanted somewhere private, right, beyond prying eyes. And . . . well, this is where I come, sometimes. Get away, bit of space. Quiet.

Weatherill Really. (Looking around.) I never really liked it in here.

Harrison Over a million Parliamentary bills. Every single law of the land that was ever passed, signed by the Queen. Rolled up and stuffed in ’ere.

Weatherill Well, not been many of those recently.

Harrison And whose fault is that? Look, your own bloody enquiry cleared us, right? The Lady admitted it in the House. I didn’t cheat, Pendry didn’t, no one did. Done. Come on, Jack, it’s bad enough you’re keeping everyone up all hours of the night now. Open up the usual channels again, bring pairing back. These are old men. And not like your lot, men who’ve worked, who’ve been down pits, who’ve –

Weatherill Oh, please, and it’s got nothing to do with the amount of ale sunk in the Strangers’ every night, has it? And don’t think we don’t see the way the crows fly. Working class? What about Southampton Test – an Oxford law don. Lichfield and Tamworth, lecturer; Lancaster North, barrister. Must be getting you worried, I’ll bet? With your ‘ee by gum’, northern brute shtick. All this ‘middle classing’, you’d better learn to genteel yourself up a bit. Classical music and fine wine. Don’t want to be growing out of touch.

Harrison Out of touch, me?! Oh yeah, ’cause it’s pure accident how I hold this fragile ragbag collection together, in’t it? Nothing to do with being able to connect on all levels with –

Weatheril Oh gosh, yes, I know that, ‘the best Deputy the House has ever seen’, with all members, from all walks of life, yes, Walter, I know that.

A beat – he hadn’t meant that to come out so bitterly . . .

Harrison . . . Well, ay up, if it’s true for me, you’re going the other way. Chingford for a start, he’s an egg-and-chips man. And shopkeepers’ daughters, builders, blimey. Are you ready?

Weatherill . . . Yes. Well.

Harrison Jack. Look, I . . . we get on, don’t we? Don’t we? Please. Open up the channels. Let’s get this place moving, working again. Eh, I’ll up the bet. (Offers his hand.) Come on.

Weatherill You don’t get it, do you? We’re not playing any more.

Government Whips’ Office. Early hours of the morning.

Cocks Joe, look alive.

Harper Owt happening in the chamber?

Cocks Abingdon is quizzing agriculture, difference between North Sea and Mediterranean tuna.

Harper North Sea . . . ? There isn’t any tuna in the North Sea.

Cocks There . . . ? You joking? Oh for . . . (Begins scribbling on notepaper.)

Harper (stretching) This can’t go on, Michael. We know what they’re doing –

Cocks Of course we know, it’s what we’d be doing if we were them. (Handing the paper to him.) Here, get whoever’s on bench duty to slip this to the minister, think it’s Joe Ashton.

Harrison (enters) Brace yourself, Chief, the Scots are on the march, it’s liek Glencoe out there.

Speaker The Member for West Lothian!

West Lothian (bursts in) Michael, is it true? Devolution is going on the books?

Cocks . . . Ay, it’s true.

West Lothian Oh, Christ’s sake.

Cocks Tam, we know, alright, but –

Speaker The Member for Western Isles!

Western Isles (enters) Michael!

Cocks Don, this is the Labour Whips’ office, if you want a / meeting then –

Western Isles We want some guarantees you’ll get this bill through the house.

West Lothian Not if I can help it. You’ll fall if you propose this.

Western Isles And you fall if you don’t. We Scottish Nationalists won’t prop you lot up for ever. And the way the Tories are at the moment, they’ll talk any bill out of time.

West Lothian Good!

Harrison No, they won’t. We’re proposing a Timetable Motion. Maximum of twenty days debate.

West Lothian Twent- . . . hah! Twenty days?! For matters which haven’t been discussed let alone attempted in the living memory of this Parliament, built to serve the whole United Kingdom. A Kingdom that is United.

Western Isles And how about a Kingdom that is fair, Tam? With an equal say / for every –

Cocks You’re really telling me you’d go against your own party Whip, Tam? Doesn’t bode well for your future prospects, does it?

West Lothian What future prospects?! If you devolve powers to Scotland and Wales then we Scot and Welsh MPs in Westminster will be as useful as a chocolate teapot, won’t we? I thought handing power to Brussels was bad enough! This post-colonial fixation of just giving ourselves away! This Parliament was once the seat of the democratic world, now it’s the planet’s biggest jumble sale, with you tossing Scotland, Ireland and Wales overboard now too, shed some weight. It’s so bloody typical, this self-destructive, bloody country.

Western Isles Well. I’ll be voting with you, Michael. And good luck to you. (Exits.)

Harper I warned. I did say. Asking for trouble.

Cocks Well, we’re asking for trouble if we don’t, aren’t we?! (Exiting.) Is there any news on them fixing that sodding clock yet?!

Opposition Whips’ Office. Night.

Weatherill reclines in his chair, watching Coronation Street on the little TV. Atkins enters.

Atkins What on earth is this?

Weatherill From what I can gather, Hilda and Stan are off to a posh hotel for their second honeymoon. And this Ray chap is taking Deirdre to the Dog and Gun ‘down Eccles way’.

Atkins God, do people actually watch this stuff?

Weatherill Apparently. (Chuckles at something on screen, despite himself.) Listen Chief, you don’t think we’re taking this a bit too far, do you? Somme tactics?

Atkins Absolutely not. Well perhaps. But I thought we were trying to beat them at their own game, Jack. And what happened to our tug-of-war, remember? Bringing some strays over to our side? –

Weatherill Yes, well, it’s not as simple as all that, Chief.

Silvester (running in, panicked) Jack! Chief! Something’s happened in the chamber.

In the Chamber. Rotherham stands, pulling at his collar before falling back into the arms of other Members who carry him out, into: Government Whips’ Office. The Whips carry Rotherham in.

Taylor performs CPR.

Harrison Clear out! Give him some room!

Cocks Brian? Brian, mate, the ambulance on its way, alright?

Harrison Joe, go outside and meet them, quick as you can.

Taylor He’s not . . . Michael, he doesn’t seem to be –

Cocks takes over CPR as Silvester and Weatherill charge in.

Weatherill What happened?

Taylor He collapsed at the dispatch box.

Cocks Come on, Brian, don’t be a silly bugger.

Speaker The Member for Rushcliffe!

Rushcliffe (entering with Silvester) I’m so sorry, Michael. Walter. We were just having a good old ding-dong, nothing out the ordinary, and then . . . (Seeing Rotherham.) Oh God . . .

Harrison Oi, listen, he weren’t very well. He wasn’t well, OK? It’s nothing to do with you.

Paramedics arrive in the office and take over.

Weatherill Come on, we’d better give them some space, we’ll, we’ll –

Rushcliffe (weeping) I’m so sorry.

Harrison (more privately) Oi. Make sure your man doesn’t take this on himself, OK? This isn’t going to look very good, he’ll need protecting. And ‘no one dies in the Palace’, remember?

Taylor Well, now hold on, no, it –

Weatherill goes, with Ruschcliffe.

Paramedics What’s his name?

Cocks He’s the memb – I mean, Brian. His name’s Brian.

Paramedics Brian? You’re alright.

The Paramedics leave with Rotherham, having put him on a stretcher.

Taylor Michael, this whole ‘no one dies in the . . . ’ This, it isn’t good enough, Brian’s just . . . there need to be consequences –

Cocks Oh and what do we do to them, that side? Stroke them with feathers?! No, we . . . (Flicking through a book.) I need to, shit, phone his wife, and . . .

The phone rings. He answers.

Not bloody now . . . Oh. Sorry . . . (Looks at the others.) Right . . . well, thank you for letting us know, Jack. (Puts the phone down.) Pairing. It’s back on.

Scene Three

Government Whips’ Office. Late night, darkly lit, ‘–5’ now on the board.

Harrison sits, his feet on the desk, listening to Wagner. He studies the record sleeve.

Taylor (entering, slowing to a stop) Blimey, what’s going on here?

Harrison From what I can make out, this Tannhäuser chap’s gone missing and his missus, Liz, she’s not happy. And when they’re not happy in opera they’re properly not happy. I’ve an ’orrible feeling it’s all going to go wrong.

Taylor And why’s that?

Harrison Well. Opera, innit. It always goes tits up in the end. (Flicks it off.)

Lady Batley (knocking, entering) Helloo?

Harrison Whey, Lady Broughton, how’s the Doc, all set?

Lady Batley Yes, we ju – I just wanted to say thank you. For putting us up while pairing was off. Oh, hark at me ‘putting us up’, feel like we’re checking out of a B&B. Harrison You’re very welcome, love, just leave your money on the side.

Lady Batley (laughs) Well. Just one more, erm . . . (Quieter.) I, I wondered about finally looking into . . . you know . . . letting Alf bow out. Finding a replacement, Batley?

Harrison Of course, my lovely. We want you enjoying your retirement, don’t we?

Speaker The Member for Newham North East!

Lady Batley exits. Cocks enters, followed by Newham North East.

Newham North East It’s becoming intolerable, Michael. This Militant Left lot, they’ve infiltrated my local party, and they’re close, they’re this close I swear, from deselecting me, unless I – what? – start calling for revolution. The guillotine!

Cocks Reg, I understand, we’ll talk, just . . . not now.

Newham North East It’s a ticking bomb, this, Michael, I’m warning you. (Leaves, disgruntled.)

Cocks Exit poll in Ashfield, unbelievable. Tories are gonna take it. That and Birmingham Stetchford.

Harrison You what? Ashfield, that’s a mining town?! What they voting Tory for?!

Cocks Can’t fucking believe them two. Roy and David going off to Europe, thanks very much! (Replaces ‘–5’ with ‘–7’ on the board.) We finally get pairing back so the sick ones can stay home, and now the healthy ones are throwing their toys out of the pram. Jesus.

Taylor Coventry South West is on her way down, Chief.

Cocks Whatever happened to loyalty, eh? Compromise, seeing both sides, helping each other out. Do they want to get booted out? ’S like turkeys voting for sodding Christmas here.

Speaker Coventry South West!

Coventry South West (entering) Hello everyone, ooh, ’s nice in here, isn’t it?

Harrison (gritted teeth) Would you like a drink, Audrey?

Coventry South West Ta. Don’t bother with the posh plonk, I can’t tell Stork from butter, me.

Cocks Audrey. Cut to the chase. Your increasing displays of disloyalty, under normal circumstances, would not only not be tolerated, but –

Coventry South West Disloyalty? Who to? It’d be disloyal to go against my principles, surely?

Harrison This is a hung Parliament, compromises have to be made on policy.

Coventry South West Well, can you explain why we’ve been voted in to look after working-class interests, the underfunded parts of the country, but our Chancellor is proposing 1.25 billion pounds worth of cuts? I’m not the only one, you know, a lot of our lot agree with me.

Cocks And how would you feel if we became the first government in living memory to lose the House and be forced into an election, eh?

Coventry South West Well. Given that I’ve always voted for my constituents over my Party, my ratings locally are through the roof. What about you, dear, how’s yours looking?

Cocks . . . Flatter yourself if you want that they voted for you personally, but they didn’t. They voted for the Party. Based on class. Based on economic group. Based on geography.

Based on what their effing mums and dads used to vote for. Not you. OK? This is how it works.

Coventry South West My understanding of this democracy is that people were sent to look after the interests of their neighbours, not just do as they were told by you lot.

Taylor So you pay no heed of the benefits of working together as a party, with shared ideals, not on every specific detail, no, but still able to come together? In order to get stuff done. It’s not perfect, Audrey, but it’s all we’ve got.

Coventry South West It’s only not perfect because no one is strong enough to challenge it. Well. No one was strong enough. There are ‘plans afoot’. (Drinks.) Ta for the sherry.

She exits.

Harrison Audrey. Audrey?! Get back here now!

Cocks Leave her, Walter. Right. Devolution vote. What are the numbers?

Harrison (at the board) Sorry. Unless you’ve got any miracles you’ve been saving up, we’re not going to make it.

The Chamber.

Speaker The question is that the Allocation of Time motion for the Scotland and Wales Bill be now read a second time.

Ayes to the right, 283 . . . Noes to the left . . . 312. The Noes have it!

Opposition Whips’ Office.

Atkins, Weatherill, Silvester and Esher come in laughing, singing ‘You take the high road, and I’ll take the low road’, each performing Highland flings of sorts.

Atkins Well, gentlemen, thanks to the Government’s own failed stab at a Highland fling, ner-haha, I think we can safely say their flagship Devolution Bill is dead in the water. Which means –

Cocks (knocks and enters) I thought I’d come over myself, save you the bother.

Atkins Oh Michael, it wouldn’t have been any bother, but nevertheless, here you are. And so Mr Cocks, it is of course with deep regret that I inform you – I think we should all be upstanding for this, Fred – that we shall be presenting a motion of censure to Parliament . . . ‘that this House has no confidence in Her Majesty’s Government’.

Cocks Vote on Wednesday 23rd, 10 p.m.?

Atkins Yes, that’s what we thought. Great minds, eh?

Cocks exits into the Members’ Lobby.

Harrison (joining Cocks) With no Devolution Bill timetabled the Scot and Welsh Nats will have to vote against us, leaving us around 312 to 320. We’d be out.

Harper Look, if we’re struggling for numbers, can’t we try and get some pairs?

Taylor No, Joe, it’s a no-confidence vote, they won’t pair.

Cocks They’re trying to prove we haven’t the numbers to govern, after all.

Taylor Well, we’d better set other wheels in motion then, hadn’t we?

She steps into:

Speaker The Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles!

Peebles Mrs Taylor. And what, I wonder, can I do for you?

Taylor We wondered if you were available for a little chat? Not here. Downing Street.

Peebles Oof, Downing Street, little old me, a Liberal. ‘Downing Street’. Well. Would you like me to go in through the front, or around the back?

Taylor Around the back. For now. If you’d be so kind . . .

Peebles (a little smile, and a nod) But of course.

Opposition Whips’ Office.

Papers everywhere, the Whips scribbling, pacing, totting up.

Esher (entering with a whisky) Quick, get yourself to Annie’s, it’s a free bar.

Atkins Free bar on the eve of a no-confidence vote? Why, they’d make a killing.

Esher No, it’s the, the, what’s his name, Berwick. Liberal – hah, right ‘liberal’ with his coins, say that much. Put a wodge behind the bar and told us to go guns blazing.

Sylvester (lowers his reports) You what? Why?

Esher Dunno, old boy, probably to say sorry for running over, I expect. They’re in our committee room, some party meeting thing. Something. I don’t know.

Atkins Li – Liberal Pa – We didn’t know this, why didn’t we know this, what are they meet – on the day of a . . .

Slams his documents down. Looks at Weatherill.

Weatherill . . . Surely not.

Government Whips’ Office. All the Whips are there.

Harrison Why hasn’t Peebles phoned yet? Must be close, maybe tied. Sod it, I’m going up.

Taylor Walter you can’t just storm into a Liberal Party meeting, you’re a Labour Whip!

Harrison Watch me – (Opens the door.)

Atkins (in the doorway) What are you up to?

Harrison Shit – (Slams the door shut, locks it.) They’re on to us.

Atkins (off, behind the door) Don’t be silly, Walter, let me in!

Harrison Haha, what you gonna do, huff and puff and blow this house down?

Atkins (entering) No, just use my key.

Cocks/Harrison/Harper Oi!

Harrison Where did you get that from?

Atkins Never mind that. / What are you up to?

Cocks Piss off, Atkins – Sorry Ann.

Taylor Get the FUCK OUT of this office, now!

Atkins ( flinching back) Alright old girl, steady on.

Cocks ( phone rings) Alright, all of you, quiet! (Answers.) Hello?

. . . Yes . . . Oh. Oh right . . . Aha . . . (More solemn. Sighs.) Yes, I understand. (Phone down.)

Harrison Well, what is it?

Cocks walks slowly into the room, turning to face his team . . . before whipping around in an explosion of laughter, pointing in a ‘ner-ner’ way at the Opposition Whips.

Cocks Aaaaaah-HAHAHAHAHA!

Harrison They went for it?!

Cocks A Liberal–Labour pact, my friend! Signed, sealed and bloody delivered! GET SOME IN!

Harrison/Harper YES!

Atkins You can’t do that! That is / totally undemocratic, and might I add . . . Michael . . .

Harrison (running to the board with his chalk) So what’s that, all thirteen?!

Cocks (totting it up with him) All thirteen, that’s a whole baker’s dozen off their tally and a big fat baker’s dozen on to our side, that’s a majority of / (Replaces –8 with +18 ) eighteen! Haha! Our two parties, walking into the lobby together, two by two, by bloody two –

Cocks exits.

Harrison Thanks for popping in, Humphrey. Now bugger off, we’ve got a country to run!

The Clock Tower: Cocks with Clockmaker.

Cocks And you’re sure it won’t happen again soon?

Clockmaker Oh, I wouldn’t think so. These things are built to last, Mr Cocks. Just need a bit of love and attention every now again, know what I mean?! (Shouting down through a hole.) Alright, let her go!

The grinding and squealing of gears before, gradually, the hands of the big clock begin to turn. Cocks stands staring up at them. Beaming . . .

The Members’ Chorus appear below and watch the clock, giving a short, soft verse of ‘I Vow to Thee, My Country’.

Scene Four

The Commons’ Barbers.

Speaker The Member for Birmingham Perry Barr!

Perry Barr is lathered up, getting a shave from the Barber. Weatherill enters and sits.

Weatherill Any chance of a quick tidy up?

Barber Course, Mr Weatherill sir. Take a seat.

Perry Barr Bloody ’ell. ’S a pretty sharp suit you’ve got, there.

Weatherill Oh. Well, thank you. It’s Jeff, isn’t it? Perry Barr? Jack Weatherill.

Perry Barr ( playful gasp) The enemy.

Weatherill Hardly. In fact, I hear a growing number of you are in rather hot water with your own party. This Coventry lady seems quite a character.

Perry Barr Well, like me, she just wants what’s fair. Remember our roots.

Weatherill Oh of course, yes. I mean it’s quite a budget this year, isn’t it? For a socialist government. Cuts in spending. Higher taxes for the worse off.

Perry Barr Well. What can you do, it’s the budget. Budgets always pass.

Weatherill Well, they have to go through committee stage, like anything else. The opposition can in theory table amendments.

Perry Barr Never passed though, eh? Never happened.

Weatherill No. No, never happened. But if certain . . . well, how would you describe – certain ‘disgruntled’ government backbenchers joined with the opposition, well, then . . . anything would be possible. (Beat.) Worth thinking about, anyway.

Opposition Whips’ Office.

Speaker The Members for Birmingham Perry Barr and Coventry South West!

Coventry South West Oh. Everything’s the same in here but the other way around.

Atkins Right, let’s not beat around Shepherd’s Bush, shall we? Your proposed amendment. To link tax allowances with the rate of inflation, reducing the government’s income by . . . nearly half a billion pounds.

Coventry South West Or rather saving working families that amount. Yes.

Atkins Of course, you’re right. In fact given this will be the first time a wrecking amendment to a government’s budget has been proposed by the government’s party . . . I think I can safely say we’re pretty excited to see how it goes down.

Coventry South West The only parties I like, Mr Atkins, have jelly and ice cream and clowns prancing about.

Atkins Well you’ll be right at home at the Labour Conference then. But, if I may . . .

With a document and a pen. Beat. Coventry South West signs.

Atkins You’re heroes, that’s what you are. Anything to add, anyone?

Esher I don’t give a beggar’s fart, long as we shove it up their piss-pipe and make it sting.

Atkins As ever, wise, strange words. Good health.

Silvester and Esher show the Labour members out. Weatherill is busying himself.

Atkins Well, this is our greatest strike yet! Imagine the gasket they’ll blow when they hear this! All down to you, Jack.

Weatherill Mmm. Well it was. All of us –

Atkins Jack. I’m trying to say well done. You did well. Really well.

Weatherill (uncomfortably) . . . Thank you.

Government Whips’ Office. Whips working. Harrison is on the phone as Cocks enters.

Harrison Thank you. (Slamming the phone down.) That bloody woman. Michael! As if destroying our budget wasn’t bad enough! Marched with the striking Asian workers at Grunwick yesterday, got herself arrested for allegedly punching someone.

Cocks Oh for – Right, I’ll have her! I swear to . . . (Picking up the phone.)

Harper Wish we could send her to bloody ‘Coventry’. God’s gift to the Tories, this lot. ’S unbelievable.

Cocks (on the phone) Audrey. Michael Cocks. We’ve heard about your day out yesterday . . . Aud – Audrey, shut up a second. You’re a Labour Member who got arrested for physical assault, now . . . Well, regardless, you have to do one of the following, alright, either pay a £20 fine . . . Aud – A £20 fine, or you can come down here and write a formal apology, now which is it to be? . . . good. (Phone down.) She’s coming down.

Taylor (with newspapers) Papers are still full of their budget sabotage, Chief.

Cocks The smug look on the aristo-twats’ faces, all poncing around like Cheshire cats.

Harrison Oi, least we’re hanging in, even getting stuff through now. Sod ’em, right?

Speaker Member for Coventry South West!

Cocks Right. Sit down. Let’s get this drafted, shall we –

Coventry South West strides over and sits, opening her handbag. She takes out a coin and places it on the desk. Then another. And another, continuing with smaller denominations. When she’s done, she closes her handbag, stands, and calmly strides out. Silence.

Harrison That was pretty fucking good, actually.

Committee Room Corridor. Dead of night.

Cocks passing one way with a blanket. Atkins the other (his blanket is tartan).

Atkins Ah, Michael. Looking for somewhere to hunker down as well?

Cocks Off to try and bag the sofa in Committee Room 8. Oh, Humphrey, that’s a very pretty blanket, did Jack knit you that?

Atkins This happens to be the Atkins’ family tartan.

Cocks A shameless attempt to curry favour with the Scots.

Atkins Well, given you’re having yet another tragic stab at devolution, we must try what we can. (Yawns.) So terribly exhausting, isn’t it?

Cocks And whose fault is that?

Atkins Oh, so stop limping on then, why don’t you? All this compromising, this faction, that faction, this party, that party.

Cocks I happen to be quite at peace with it, Humphrey. In fact I rather think we would do better as a House, a system, if we did all cooperate more. Maybe it’s the way forward.

Atkins The ‘way forward’? It’s been ‘the way’ since the war, all of us ‘palling along’. Well, do you know what, I’ll be honest with you. Yes, at first, I was a little nervous. Having her at the helm. But I’ve come to realise that she’s precisely what Parliament needs. An end to this ‘national consensus’, trying to please everyone. Time instead to strike out, in one distinctive direction, get things done.

Cocks Rip the country apart, you mean. Oh yeah, sounds cracking –

Atkins Do you know how many divisions you’ve lost, you and your team, in this ‘glorious age of compromising and cooperation’? Macmillan’s government, they didn’t lose any, neither did Eden’s. Heath’s, I regret to say, lost six. You lot? Thus far?

Cocks Do enlighten me, Humphrey –

Atkins Fifty-seven. A record, I might add. Over fifty failed attempts . . . to govern.

Cocks . . .

Atkins It doesn’t work, Michael. One party governs, and one party opposes. That’s our system. That’s this building. Two sides of the house, two sides of the argument, facing off against each other: the gap between the government and opposition benches the precise length of two swords drawn.

Their tips, touching. We are not built for cooperation, Michael. You get a chance, we try and stop you. We get a chance, you try and stop us. That’s our way.

Cocks God, such a, an innate, instinctive Tory inability to, to cooperate and ‘share’, eh? Conservative Britain: ‘As long as I’m alright, every bugger else can go hang.’

Atkins Right, yes, as opposed to Labour Britain: ‘Yes, it’s shit. But at least it’s equally shit for everyone.’ It’s the arrogance of your lot, I can’t stand. The fiddling and the meddling and the ‘managing’.

Cocks Well, some of us happen to think there’s a hell of a lot more to get done, so forgive me if we don’t shut up shop just yet.

Atkins ‘Get done’? That’s my point, you aren’t doing anything.

Cocks We’re keeping you out. That’s something.

Speaker The Member for Newham North East!

Newham North East enters, led in by Weatherill.

Atkins Well, don’t think we haven’t still got a few tricks up our sleeve.

Weatherill Chief? Ready when you are.

Atkins Excellent. (Leaving Cocks.) Excuse me, would you?

Cocks Reg?

Newham North East I warned you, Michael.

Cocks Reg, what are you doing?

Newham North East I warned you. My local party, those anarchists, that’s it, I’m out, I’m done.

Cocks (hopping after him) Wait, just wait a minute, for Christ’s sake, let’s at least talk. Look, fine, lose the Labour whip, be an independent, make your point, fine, but don’t you dare go and join the enemy ranks! That’s –

Newham North East You’ve lost control, Michael. The party, it’s collapsing in on itself.

Cocks You’re a government minister, crossing the floor to become a Tory! Reg! Wh – why?

Newham North East Everyone needs somewhere to go, Michael.

Newham North East leaves with Atkins and Weatherill. Harper joins Cocks, breathless.

Harper I got him! I got the bastard! Stockport North, my rebel, stick him down on the list for the Broadcasting Bill.

Cocks (despondent; leaving) Well done, Joe. Every vote counts.

Harper Turns out he’s a train spotter, got him on the Railways Committee, didn’t I, that and a new carpet for his corridor. I bloody got ’im. (Clutches his heart.) Oh no . . . not here . . . (Dials. Then on the phone.) Love? . . . Y-yeah, stick kettle on. I’m coming home . . .

He puts the phone down and stands. Wagner’s ‘Tannhäuser’ begins to play from the record player again as Harper stands as best he can and does up his tie.

Harper Nobody dies in the Palace . . .

Speaker The Member for Pontefract and Castleford!

Harper exits, as the music swells.

The Terrace: a memorial. Black suits and ties. Drinks.

Harrison Warm beer, he would have enjoyed this.

Cocks Seventeen. Seventeen of our lot dead since we got in.

Another wonderful record.

Harrison Who could have predicted?

Cocks He did. Walsall North. He saw it.

Harrison Oh, this again. Michael –

Cocks He saw something . . .

Harrison . . . Well. (Stubs his fag out.) I didn’t think the coalition would die so quickly.

Cocks Been a year. Couldn’t last for ever.

Harrison (smokes) Oh well. Back to hung again. Feels like a divorce. And they get the kids.

Cocks Yeah, and I should know. (Smokes. Looks.) Oh don’t make out you didn’t know.

Harrison Still. I’m . . . sorry, that, it must be . . . hard going.

Cocks Make a little note in my file, did you, when you heard the rumours? Oh, don’t look so bloody awkward. I’ve written plenty in yours over the years.

Harrison What, ‘Too bloody handsome for his own good’?

Cocks Oh yes, ‘Has dangerous delusion of grandeur. And is an awkward bloody bastard’.

Laughs. Stops. Takes a deep breath. Holds his hand to his mouth. Struggling . . .

Beat. beat. Harrison puts a hand under his arm.

Harrison . . . Pub?

Cocks Oh fff – (Looks around, suddenly aware.) . . . Ffolkestone South, yes.

Scene Five

The Westminster Clock looms large, hands turning. Sound snippets of new footage from the Winter of 1978–79: the Lib-Lab pact draws to its end, the coldest winter in memory, strikes due to wage restraints. Scotland and Wales go to the polls on devolution . . .

Members’ Lobby. Atkins, Weatherill and Silvester pacing into the centre to face Cocks, Harrison and Taylor.

Atkins Here we are then. Following yet another failure on Devolution, we shall present our motion of censure, No Confidence in your Government, blah, blah, blah, you get the point. Next Wednesday for the vote?

Cocks The 28th? Fine.

Atkins Fine. Such a shame the snow kept voters at home on the referendum. Still. That’s the British weather. Never changes.

They turn and separate at speed.

Atkins Right, this is the big one chaps! We’ve got them on the ropes! One final push!

The Commons Chamber. An explosion of action as the Members leave the banks of seats in pandemonium, grabbing each other, snippets of questions above the din – ‘Which way are you going?’ – ‘Do you think the government will fall?’ – fading under news sound bites – ‘Only one or two votes in it’ – ‘Bookmakers shortening their odds?’ – ‘Will a general election be called?’ – as the Westminster clock face appears, the hands turning at a frantic speed.

Government Whips’ Office.

Harrison gets a phone call from Lady Batley, away in her own space.

Lady Batley Walter? It’s Lady Broughton.

Harrison Lad – Is it the Doc, is he OK?

Lady Batley Look, we know this one’s going to be tight, one or two in it, and I’m . . . I’m worried you’re going to ask him because if you ask him, he’ll come, and if he comes . . . I’m worried he won’t make it. Walter.

Harrison . . .

Lady Batley I know how important it is, I do. It’s been his life. Our bloody life. But . . . please. Maybe this time. Maybe don’t ask him. This time. Please, Walter. I’ve got to go –

She hangs up. As does Harrison, as Cocks and Taylor enter at pace. On the board: ‘–16’.

Harrison Right! Battle stations, Chief, let’s get cracking.

Cocks So. (Looking at the numbers.) Can we do this? Can we win it?

Harrison Not with just our lot, we’ll need the odds and sods, as many as we can. Let’s show the bastards, five full years, right?!

Taylor Yes! Come on! Nearly there!

Cocks Right! One for all and all for one! . . . Sorry, that was shit.

Harrison OK, let’s hit that rainbow. I’ll start with the leprechauns.

Speaker Members for Belfast West, Belfast North, Armagh and Fermanagh!

The Strangers’ Bar with Harrison.

Armagh We’ve already said we’ll abstain.

Harrison No, we need you to actually bloody well turn up and walk into the ‘no’ lobby with us.

Fermanagh No? I thought yous were ‘aye’?

Harrison Blinking Nora! Please don’t get the lobbies mixed up! This is an Opposition motion, so we want you voting No, saying that you have Confidence in us, right?

Armagh Look, we’d like to keep you fellas in, but we’re gonna need something to take back to our constituents and say, look, this is what we got, ain’t it grand? Like the pipeline –

Belfast North Aw, the pipeline would be smashing; that’s been on the cards for years.

Harrison I’ll see what I can do, right? And I know my man Belfast West will be walking through the right lobby, never put a foot wrong all these years, eh, Gerry?

Belfast West Well you know, it, it, it . . . (Pause.) It’s tricky, isn’t it? Voting on little things and tiny what-have-yous, it’s different, isn’t it? But . . . but voting to actually keep the British government in power that’s . . . that’d be a little harder to sell back home. You . . . you know?

Harrison Don’t pull my pisser, you. I know you won’t let us down at the last hurdle. Bar keep!

Speaker The Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles! Taylor with Peebles.

Peebles You’ll have perhaps two Liberals. Maybe three. The rest need to be seen to stand up to you, to keep their seats. They won’t budge.

Speaker The Member for Western Isles!

Weatherill and Atkins with the Member for Western Isles.

Atkins Come on now, that’s twice Labour have failed Scotland. It’s time to join with us!

Western Isles Look. We’ll walk in with you if only to save our own seats. Nothing more.

The Clock hands turn rapidly under news snippets. ‘Will today be the first time in over half a century a government falls at the hand of Parliament, rather than the people . . . ?’

Opposition Whips’ Office. Atkins, Weatherill, Silvester and Esher.

Atkins OK, the drill, every single one of our members are coming here to register and are not permitted to leave the building after six o’clock under any circumstances. Jack?

Weatherill (at the board) We’ve got the Scots, are working on the Welsh. Irish are unpredictable and there’s no news on Batley yet.

Atkins Fred, I want someone from a local association at Leeds train station immediately, if he sees Batley getting on a train down here I want to be the first to know.

Speaker The Member for Batley!

Harrison gets a phone call from Batley, away in his own space.

Batley Walter? It’s the Doc.

Harrison Doc! How are you?

Batley Yeah, shh, the wife she doesn’t . . . (Intake of air.) doesn’t know I’m . . . Look, how we doing, numbers wise? Do you need me down? I’ve got me bags packed, but, Walter, there’s, there’s newspapers outside, they’re all . . . (Intake of air.) . . . they’re all watching.

Harrison Doc, you . . . (Beat.) You don’t sound too good, mate –

Batley Never mind that, right? Just say the word . . . and I’m there . . .

Harrison puts the phone down. Steps into –

Guy Fawkes Cellar. Taylor and Harrison set up a table for Armagh and Belfast North.

Speaker The Members for Armagh and for Belfast North!

Armagh The Guy Fawkes cellars? Ha. Isn’t that ironic? Centuries ago, they plotted here to bring the government down, and now here we are, plotting to prop you up.

Harrison Ann will go through the agreement on prices with you, you just have to sign and date and then we’re good to go, alright?

Speaker Member for Fermanagh!

Cleaner’s cupboard. Light bulb and a stool. Harrison jostles Fermanagh in.

Harrison There! Now no more wandering off ! I’ll be back soon.

He hands him a bottle of whisky and closes the door.

Around the Palace, all Whips in full flow, bumping into various members.

Speaker The Member for Welwyn and Hatfield!

Harrison Good to see you, Helene, alright for tonight?

Welwyn and Hatfield Front of the queue, don’t worry.

Speaker The Member for Chelmsford!

Atkins Norman –

Chelmsford Ah, Chief, just off to Sheekey’s, bite to eat.

Atkins No, not tonight! No one leaves the Palace grounds, eat here.

Chelmsford Eat here?

Atkins Norman!

Chelmsford sighs.

Speaker Armagh and Belfast North!

Guy Fawkes Cellar. Harrison running back in.

Armagh (holding the paper up) Oh look, it’s green. We’ve signed it in green ink, can’t have that, an historic, what-d’yer- ma-call-it. No, people’ll laugh at us, we have to write it out again.

Harrison (handing them a pen from his pocket) Oh, for God’s sake, quickly!

Speaker Belfast West!

The Westminster Clock Room. Cocks and Belfast West.

Belfast West Well. Would you look at that. I didn’t even know you could stand behind it.

Cocks I’ve, uh . . . never brought anyone up here. Before. It’s sort of . . . my place . . . But, erm . . . look, Gerry. I won’t try and, and bloody . . . hoodwink you or swindle you, I’ll just ask you. Will you walk into the lobby with me tonight?

Belfast West (beat; looks at the clock) You know what that feels like to me? It’s like an all-seeing eye. Looking out, across the four corners of the Kingdom. Watching. Well, a lot’s changed, Michael. I can’t ever forget this is an imperial parliament. And that just won’t do any more. I’m sorry, Michael. I truly am.

Speaker Fermanagh!

Harrison runs from here to the cupboard, opens the door, light on, takes an empty bottle from Fermanagh and replaces it with a full one, exiting, closing the door.

Government Whips’ Office. Cocks wipes out the score replacing the totals: ‘0’.

Cocks So, if we’re right, and who bloody knows, eh? Then we’re about tied, 311 to 311. That’s without the Doc.

Taylor Well. Let’s give him a call then, there’s still time.

Harrison Whoa, whoa, wait, we just need to dig bloody deeper, don’t we, win a few more of the odds –

Cocks No, no, it’s too much, no more offers, no more deals.

Harrison ‘No more – ’? It’s what we do, Chief. Oi, I’m breaking my back out there! The most important thing is stopping them getting in. Because they will, Michael, we go to the polls now and she will. And I don’t want to live in her country, right? Don’t be the man who could’ve stopped that but didn’t.

Taylor I don’t understand, we’re one man down, and the Doc wants to come.

Harrison Ann, it’ll kill him!

Taylor He’ll die happy. (Beat.) Look. He’s an old Whip himself, he knows the game! What time is it? I’ll drive up, myself, sod it. It’ll be fine, we’ll look after him, I can get there and back in time. / Just let me, please.

Harrison No, Ann! Michael?! I’m not having it, right?!

Taylor Michael?!

Harrison We said there’d have to be a line somewhere and this is it! This is the line.

Taylor After four and a half years, to get this far and it all be for nothing? This one last thing and we’ve made it, Michael . . .

Cocks (beat) No. No. Not like this.

Pause. It sinks in to the room.

Taylor Well. I’d better go see if I can twist a few more Liberal arms, hadn’t I?

Cocks Don’t try too hard, they’re flimsy and break easily.

Harrison Hold on . . . (A thought.) Hold on a bloody minute – He runs out, into –

Opposition Whips’ Office. Weatherill is putting on his new jacket in what is another brand new suit. Smoothing it down. Resplendent in his ‘victory attire’. Harrison enters and closes the door.

Harrison I need a pair.

Weatherill ( pause; then he laughs) You’re not serious.

Harrison Batley and Morley, he can’t come, and it’s an honourable tradition that you pair someone off.

Weatherill I don’t have anyone to pair him with. Everyone, of course, is here. Of course.

Harrison Then just pick one. And take them out. I’m demanding it.

Weatherill Oh? Oh. You’re demanding it. Oh sorry, well I better had then, hadn’t I? I can’t do it, Walter, for heaven’s sake. Imagine what the Lady would do to the person who didn’t walk in tonight? Career over, that’d be it. Now how do you suggest I pick that person, hmm?

Harrison I don’t care how, I’ve got the Doc at death’s door and I’m not, not going to ask him to come down. What, you want me to ask him to come, is that it?!

Weatherill . . . That isn’t fair.

Harrison Well, what the bloody hell is?! Eh?! I’m asking you, as honourable man –

Weatherill I can’t quite believe you’re / putting me in this – Harrison – to honour the system, and to take someone out !

Long pause. Weatherill smooths down his jacket. Looks down at it, for a second.

Weatherill Alright. You’ll get your pair.

Harrison Who?

Weatherill What does it matter?

Harrison No, come on, I want this in writing; who?

Weatherill . . . Me. I’ll do it. I’ll step out.

Harrison . . .You? You’d . . . Oh, don’t try and pull that with me, Jack, right? Cause it won’t work –

Weatherill I’m not trying to pull anything, Walter, you’ve a right to ask for a pair and you did; and I’m giving you one. There.

Harrison (long beat) Oh, bloody hell . . . It’s all I ever wanted. You know. Other folk what came in with me. All talking about Cabinet posts, and . . . and the ‘top job’. This is all I ever wanted. To be in the engine room. And I have . . . bloody loved it . . . Do you know, I think it’d all work fine, this thing. British democracy. If it weren’t so damn reliant on people. People who get ill. Get sick. People who change their mind, who forget who they are, what they want. People who fall in and out of love. Just . . . people . . .

Pause.

This conversation, it never happened, right?

Weatherill Sorry?

Harrison Forget it, no pairing. I didn’t ask.

Weatherill I’m offering myself here, you’re going to turn this down? –

Harrison Yeah. I am. And if you ever bloody tell anyone, I will hunt you down like a dog, understand? We keep this between ourselves until one of us pops our clogs. I have a reputation you know.

Weatherill (smiles; offers his hand) Alright. (Shakes.) I plan to long outlive you, anyway.

Harrison Bollocks.

Weatherill Fifty quid? Big Ben chimes.

Speaker The Question is . . . that this House has No Confidence in Her Majesty’s Government. Lock the doors!

The Members pile off the benches, and vote.

Speaker Ayes to the right . . . 311. Noes to the left . . . 300

. . . and 10 ! (Above the din.) The Ayes have it! The Ayes have it! Motion carried! That this House has No Confidence in Her Majesty’s Government!

Opposition Whips’ Office: Atkins, Silvester, Mather and other Tory Members dance around, cheering, popping champagne. Weatherill breaks away, ever so slightly conflicted.

Government Whips’ Office: Cocks, Taylor and Harrison, standing in their own spots. Silence.

Cocks I . . . I can’t think what to, er –

Taylor It’s alright, Chief.

Cocks Just. Can’t believe that’s it. Over.

Harrison Well. It might not be, eh? Might end up back here, / live to fight a –

Cocks Oh, don’t bloody well, bloody ‘manage’ me, Walter, I’m not one of your sheep. We’re not coming back, that’s it. We lost, I lost, I’m . . . sorry,

Harrison Oi, don’t you dare. Ann, you an’ all, chin up.

Taylor . . .

Harrison Right, you pair! Here, now. That’s a three-line whip, that is, no arguing. Here.

He pulls them together, arms around them.

Four and a half years. They only gave us four bloody weeks. Eh?

Pulling away.

Right, what time is it? I’ve, er. Got to go for a little drive.

Harrison steps into –

Lady Batley. Leading Harrison over to Batley in his chair. Asleep. Mask on.

Lady Batley You shouldn’t have driven all this way, you look like death warmed up.

Harrison I know, it’s just. I want it coming from me.

Lady Batley (carefully waking Batley) Alfred . . . Alf . . . you’ve got a visitor . . .

Batley (turns; sees her, then him . . . through his mask weakly) Did we . . . win?

Harrison . . . No, mate. I’m sorry.

Lady Batley Get to retire now, though, Alf. So that’s good, eh?

Batley . . . By . . . how many?

Harrison Doesn’t matter by how many, does it?

Batley . . . How . . . many . . .

Harrison (beat; kneels down, takes his hand ) By one, Doc. Lost by one . . .

Oi, nowt could’ve been done. Right? No bugger’s fault. Nowt to be done . . .

Batley, through his mask, starts to sob. Harrison leans in.

Announcements from the 1979 election, and Margaret Thatcher seizing power.

Government Whips’ Office. Atkins replaces the painting in the office from the opening. He exits, leaving Weatherill with Harrison, who is packing his boxes to leave. Weatherill moving in.

Harrison Majority of 43? Well done, Jack. That should see you well. Get stuff done, eh?

Weatherill Yes. Well. Shame in a way. I’ll miss the excitement.

Harrison Well, you know what you’re doing, you’ll be fine.

Weatherill Well, I learnt from the best. (Then feels awkward.) Anyway. I was sorry to hear about the uh, the Doc. Was it his lungs that went in the end?

Harrison No, actually, it was his heart. So. (Handing him some money.) Here. Fifty quid.

Weatherill No, don’t be silly, Walter, honestly it –

Harrison Oh, don’t talk so soft. I’d be taking it from you if it were other way round, believe me.

Weatherill (beat; takes it) Thank you. (Another beat. Holds it up.) Drink?

Harrison Oh, bloody hell, yeah.

Weatherill Michael not around?

Harrison No. No, we all need somewhere to go . . .

Exits, closing the door behind him.

The Westminster Clock Tower: the face of the clock looming large and high. Hands turning . . .

Cocks stands, with his back to us, staring out through the glass. Blackout.





The Angry Brigade





The Angry Brigade was first performed at Theatre Royal Plymouth in a production by Paines Plough and Theatre Royal Plymouth on 18 September 2014 with the following cast and creatives:

Morris/The Commander Harry Melling

The Prophet/The Snitch/ The Manager/Jim/Smith/John Felix Scott

Henderson/Anna Patsy Ferran

Parker/The Expert/The Model/ The Girl/Hilary Scarlett Alice Johnson



Director James Grieve

Designer Lucy Osborne

Lighting Designer Charles Balfour

Sound Designer Tom Gibbons

Movement Director Polly Bennett

Assistant Director Hannah Banister

The Branch The Brigade

Characters Characters

Smith John

Henderson Anna

Parker Hilary

Morris Jim



The Commander

The Expert

The Model

The Prophet

The Snitch

The Manager

The Girl

Setting Setting

Scotland Yard, central London, 1970–72 359 Amhurst Road, London, 1970–72





A ‘COMMUNIQUÉ’ FROM THE AUTHOR

The play works in two parts.

One part, THE BRANCH, is the police attempt to capture the Angry Brigade terror cell.

One part, THE BRIGADE, is the cell’s attempt to evade capture by the police.

They can be performed in either order.

It’s suggested that both are performed by a cast of only four.

The style of THE BRANCH should feel rigid in its presentation. The detail in the text is deliberately prescriptive. It is a world of order and characters who carry themselves in a carefully considered way. It can be presented as painfully conventional as possible.

THE BRIGADE should be an offensive, anarchic mess. The text is deliberately non-prescriptive. A bold cacophony of music, media and physicality is encouraged.

Perhaps the four performers present one half to an audience, followed by the other.

Or, perhaps both parts are performed simultaneously by two separate ensembles of four, to two separate audiences, and then after an interval they swap.

Perhaps the two parts can have a completely different creative team.

Perhaps just do what you like.





The Branch

Scene One

A basement office, Scotland Yard. The early hours.

Smith stands near the entrance to the basement. The Commander has been waiting for him. A pot of tea waits on a tray.

The Commander Would you like some tea, Smith? It is Smith, isn’t it?

Smith Yes, sir.

The Commander ‘Yes, sir’, some tea, or ‘yes, sir’, it’s Smith?

Smith Yes sir, it’s Smith.

The Commander You don’t want tea?

Smith Tea would be – yes, thank you, tea would be smashing.

The Commander A man should have tea. This early.

Smith checks his watch. The Commander begins to prepare the tea.

The Commander Had it brought down especially. To welcome you. Your new home from home.

(Looking around.) It’s not all bad, is it, down here, really?

Smith I have to be honest, I wasn’t until a moment ago aware that Scotland Yard had a – I suppose you would call this a basement, wouldn’t you, sir?

The Commander Oh, all public buildings have a basement, Detective Sergeant. It’s where ‘things’ happen.

Smith Detective Sergeant?

The Commander Commander, Smith. As you should be well aware.

Smith Yes, sir, you’re Commander Bond, sir, I know who you are, it’s just that – you called me Detective Sergeant, which makes me think you have the wrong Smith, sir.

The Commander The wrong Smith?

Smith I’m Detective Constable Smith.

The Commander You were Detective Constable Smith, you’re now Detective Sergeant Smith, has this not been relayed to you?

Smith I only had a quick phone call with the Chief Super, sir, at 1 a.m. He told me to come straight to the Yard, immediately, that’s all.

The Commander Yes. I’m afraid this has all had to move – rather quickly.

Something . . . has happened. And we’re at a bit of a loss at what to do.

He tries to laugh this off, a little, but isn’t convincing. A moment.

Did you get in alright?

Smith Yes, sir, I live near the Elephant, caught the night bus.

The Commander The 33 isn’t it; Elephant?

Smith 33 will get you here no problem, sir, yes, but it was the 92 I took, arrived first.

The Commander 92 is a good bus – milk?

Smith Yes please, sir, just a splash.

The Commander You’ve been teaching at Bramshill.

Smith Yes, two-year secondment.

The Commander Sugar?

He drops one cube into his own cup.

Smith Thank you, sir, two please.

The Commander briefly stops at the mention of ‘two’, a slight air of disapproval, before placing two cubes into Smith’s cup. He stirs the cups gently and methodically.

The Commander Teaching what?

Smith At Bramshill? It’s – well it’s sort of new, sir.

The Commander That’s enough of the ‘sirs’, Smith. This is Special Branch. You’re one of us now.

He hands the cup and saucer over to Smith, smiling. Smith takes it.

The Commander What was new? The teaching.

Smith It’s called ‘Association’, it’s sort of my speciality – I mean it’s DCS Habershon’s speciality, I didn’t mean to imply that it was mine entirely.

The Commander Tea, don’t let it get cold.

Smith Right – (taking it) sorry –

The Commander Them’s what do without, and all that.

You were with DCS Habershon in S Division.

Smith That’s right, sir. (Winces at using ‘sir’.)

The Commander (offering) Biscuit?

Smith (taking one) Thank you.

The Commander He speaks jolly highly of you. Something of a protégé, by the way he talks, I’d say.

Smith Oh, well that’s very cheering to hear, I must say.

The Commander (holding up the biscuit) My wife. She cannot stand a good dunk. Says I’m bringing home all these ‘common ways’, she imagines, from the ‘canteen’. Reading a newspaper at the dinner table and dunking biscuits, that sort of thing. ‘As though we hadn’t even won the bloody war,’ she says. I say to her, ‘Emily, I think that’s a bit far, it’s only a biscuit’. ‘Cup of tea is what this nation was built on,’ she says, no need to dunk anything into it. No need to do anything of the sort.

(Dunks his biscuit.) So this is – is a little rebellion.

‘Association’, then. In a nutshell.

Smith ‘Connecting the dots’, my missus calls it.

The Commander Share police business with your wife, do you? That what constitutes pillow talk in the Smith household, ey? I’m teasing, Smith.

He lifts his biscuit from the tea to his mouth – it flops back into his cup.

Damn.

He places his cup down. And presses a button on the intercom.

The Commander Could you come down with a spoon, please, WPC Henderson. (To Smith.) You’re about to meet WPC Henderson.

Smith Right.

The Commander WPC Henderson is one of my recommendations for your team.

Smith For my . . .

The sound of walking on the floor above them, echoing. Both men listen.

. . . my team?

The Commander You were saying, about association.

Smith Well, the beat of S Division, sir, it’s what shady characters might call a ‘don’t mind if I do’ kind of area; nice houses, nice things. Something of an easy target, you might say. Problem was –

Henderson, a uniformed officer, opens the door and walks over to the table clasping the spoon. The Commander takes it.

The Commander Thank you, Henderson.

Henderson turns and walks back. She sees Smith – they’re about the same age. Perhaps a very slight moment that disrupts their flow, until she’s gone.

The Commander clasps the teaspoon and begins to fish the biscuit out.

Smith The problem was, no one was talking to one another. There’d be a B-and-E up on Cedar Avenue, some jewellery half-inched maybe, and then on the other side of the Heath a BM Whathaveyou gets nabbed from the front drive; local uniforms jot that down in their crime book as motor theft, start looking for car thieves. What . . .

The sound of feet returning to a desk upstairs. They both listen, briefly.

. . . what no one at the respective stations was doing, Mister Bond, was connecting one crime with the other. It was the same people, you see. And they were getting away with murder. Not literally murder, you understand, murder is one of the few crimes they weren’t actually committing –

The Commander Figuratively.

Smith Exactly, sir, figuratively speaking, that’s exactly it. That’s where me and Roy – DCS Habershon – that’s where we came in to our own, as it were; I became a student of it, if you like. Connecting the key players of a syndicate or gang and we brought the whole ruddy lot of them down. ‘Association’. Drawing lines, weaving a web.

The Commander Blimey. Weaving a web.

He lifts the offending biscuit up on his teaspoon.

He stands and marches to a bin in the corner and empties the contents.

Well, one of the things about you, Smith . . . is that you’re young.

Smith I – I’m not as young as I . . . but no I suppose relatively speaking there is a youngness to me, yes.

The Commander May I . . . may I ask you something?

He shifts uncomfortably. About to embark on new territory . . .

How are you?

Smith . . .

The Commander How . . . how do you – feel? About . . . your life. About the country. How . . . how do – haha – how do you feel about me?

The older generation, the people in – ‘power’. About what we’re leaving you, as our legacy. The society we have built. Are you particularly . . . I don’t know, disappointed?

More than disappointed, would you say that you were ‘cross’, even?

Come on, we’re all friends here. It’s been the prerogative of the young to tut tut at the older lot for as many generations as there have been generations. You can say it. You can be cross. You might, might even go as far as to say you . . .

He wobbles a little.

That you were angry. Are you angry? Smith?

Smith I don’t feel particularly angry.

The Commander Do you ever get angry? Gosh, I know I do. Bloody hell. I stubbed my toe earlier this week, you know, no, it was Monday last, I had brushed my teeth, about to get into bed, whack. And I was just – grrrrrrrr. ‘Why me?’ Hah.

Ever feel like that?

Silence. . . He buzzes on the intercom.

Send her in.

Footsteps upstairs.

Someone is trying to kill us, Smith.

Smith Kill who, sir?

The Commander . . . All of us.

The Expert enters, wheeling a trolley containing popular branded products.

The Expert Commander. Detective Sergeant.

Smith Tea, and breakfast? I could get used to Special Branch.

The Expert takes out a pointing stick and references:

The Expert Weetabix. A popular breakfast cereal made by the Kellogg’s company in America. A healthy choice at any breakfast table.

Smith I confess I do put the odd spoonful of sugar onto my Weetabix.

The Expert Careful, Mr Smith. Carry on like that –

She removes the package to reveal – a bomb.

And it’ll be the death of you.

This particular box was sent to Paddington Police Station.

Smith . . . We were the targets?

The Commander Yes we were.

The Expert Crude, yes, all domestic products; mix of sugar and sodium chloride, two batteries wired to a North Sea gas lighter element, and a bog standard wrist watch you could purchase from your average Woolworths or the Coop. Thankfully it failed to detonate due to it being something of a botch job by, we thought, some loopy amateurs. But – viva la difference. I take it you are familiar with this item, Mr Smith?

Smith Surf, it’s a washing detergent.

The Commander Course he’s familiar, look at that white shirt, clean and pressed. Your wife’s a credit to you, Smith.

Smith Well, that she is, Mister Bond, but without taking anything away from my Susan, I happen to press my own shirts.

The Commander Press your own shirts, stone me. A brave new world.

The Expert removes the Surf box to reveal a more sophisticated bomb.

The Expert On 10 May last year, an Iberia Airlines flight landed at Heathrow. All luggage was removed from the runway except one bag, and in the bag was this box. The fundamentals are the same but the execution is markedly improved, not enough for a successful detonation, but nevertheless. They’re learning . . .

Smith You’re sure it’s from the same person or people?

The Expert The gelatin they use is French, same in each. And we obtained a sputum match from the cellotape.

Smith Sputum?

The Commander Spit, Smith, from the perpetrator’s gob.

The Expert The age-old habit of biting it instead; bad for your teeth. There are also, more importantly, fingerprints. No matches, which means they have no previous.

The Commander Oddly careless, though, leaving fingerprints. Maybe it’s deliberate.

Smith Unlikely, I’d say, as they didn’t intend for us to extract them.

The Commander How so?

Smith Because they expected the bomb to go off.

Beat. He continues . . .

The Commander There have been more. Sir John Rawlinson. Our police commissioner. A bomb at his house in Roehampton, last autumn. Sir Peter Waldron, of the High Court. House firebombed before Christmas. We have been trying to – ‘join the dots’. What connects an airline with the Metropolitan Police with judges with banks with embassies. Other than them all being – the ‘establishment’. Order.

Smith All this going on. Why are we – respectfully – only acting now?

Beat.

The Commander Do you know anything – about politics? Detective Sergeant.

Smith Politics? Not too much, sir, no. As much as anyone else I suppose. I vote.

The Commander Do you?

Smith Well yeah, it . . . it’s important to vote. Isn’t it?

A moment.

The Commander (slides him a file) Do you know who that is?

Smith (looks) No, sir.

The Commander That is a politician. The Minister for Employment. Last night, at his home in north London, the Minister was in his study, his 13-year-old daughter was playing the piano in the living room and his wife was in the kitchen. At approximately twenty-two hundred hours, the back door of his house . . . it blew off.

Smith It blew off?

The Commander And as the family made their way through the hallway towards the front of the house to escape via the front door . . . well the front door blew off as well. Two bombs. Designed to kill.

Smith May I ask a direct question, Mister Bond?

The Commander You may.

Smith Is it the Irish?

The Commander examines his glasses.

The Commander Detective Sergeant Smith.

He puts his glasses back on.

You are going to wish it were the Irish.

The Expert clicks a clicker.

The room goes dark as a projector hits the wall displaying a slide, with the handwritten word ‘ANGRY’, projected large.

She moves the slide to reveal a full handwritten A4 letter.

The third slide focuses in on the title.

COMMUNIQUÉ 1.

The next slide focuses in on the next sentence – and so on. All of these phrases are projected large on the screen which buzzes ominously. Nobody speaks. Just the sound of the slides clattering through the carousel.

FASCISM AND OPPRESSION

WILL BE SMASHED.

EMBASSIES.

HIGH PIGS.

SPECTACLES

JUDGES

PROPERTY.

SIGNED . . .

‘THE ANGRY BRIGADE’.

Smith They’ve written to you?

The Expert A communiqué, if we’re to adopt their own parlance, sent both to the police and the press.

The Commander Press co-operating, under a blackout, for the time being.

The Expert The address on the envelope is printed using some kind of children’s stencil set.

Smith And they actually numbered the communiqué – with a ‘1’.

The Expert Implying more to come, yes. ‘Embassies’, that speaks for itself. ‘High pigs’, we must assume senior police officers. ‘Spectacles’, we’ve drawn a complete blank on that one. ‘Judges’, pretty obvious. Finally ‘Property’, well I guess that’s every attack ever. So –

Smith What’s the French connection?

The Commander Gene Hackman?

Smith No I mean what’s the connection with the French. The gelatin, you said.

The Expert We haven’t made one yet.

Smith (thinking) Paris ’68, students, the uprising?

Who do we have as our go-to for this kind of thing? Youth activism, revolutionary anarchism, political radicalism.

The Commander Like I said, Smith. This is new. These people have no previous, no faces, no names. We are starting from scratch. Thank you, doctor. (The Expert exits.)

Now that a cabinet minister is a target, the Prime Minister is involved. These orders come straight from him. He telephoned the Commissioner personally this morning.

Smith The Prime Minister? I bet he was . . . ‘angry’. Mister Bond.

The Commander Actually, Smith, the Commissioner said he just sounded scared . . .

We’re forming a squad, upstairs, led by DCS Habershon, entirely confidential and off the books. You will be heading up a secret sub-division within the secret squad, down here, accountable directly only to Habershon and myself.

Smith Sir.

The Commander (handing him a sheet) Your team. All ‘young’, just like you.

Smith May I ask . . . why? Mister Bond. Why this subdivision? Why us?

The Commander (pacing, cleaning his glasses) I’ve spent my entire working life in the force, you know. It’s in my blood. Started on the beat. My tools were a pencil and a regular stride. Into CID, the Yard. We were cutting edge, you know, an exciting new world of forensics, fingerprints. We knew how to get into the mind of the criminal. They would make mistakes because of their weaknesses, and leave clues for us to make deductions from. A bank robber is driven by greed. A rapist by lust.

But these people? Terrorists. They’re educated. Young. And they’re homegrown. The first of their kind. They’re driven by . . . an ‘idea’.

And I . . . I don’t know how to catch an idea.

A humble moment. He finishes cleaning his glasses. Looks at Smith.

The Commander What do you need?

Beat.

Smith Books. I’m going to need lots of books.

Scene Two

Against the darkness, another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

COMMUNIQUÉ 4.

WE’RE GETTING CLOSER . . .

Lights up on the basement office.

Resembling more an office now, which Smith has been – and is still – assembling.

Four desks – on each one, a massive stack of books.

Henderson is stood, now out of her uniform and in her civvies which, privately, she constantly tugs and pulls at, rearranging. She indicates a desk to drop her box onto.

Henderson Is this one alright, sir?

Smith Less of the ‘sirs’, Henderson. You’re a Detective Constable now.

Henderson I didn’t know what to do, I’m so used to just slipping on the uniform every day, I don’t think I’ll get used to it. Choice! I can’t be doing with choice, choice takes up time in the morning.

Morris knocks and enters.

Morris DS Smith? DC Morris. I was – they told me to report to –

Smith Do come in. This is DC Henderson.

Henderson How do you do.

Morris Right, yes, how do you do. Hah. So what’s going on then? Feels like the kiddy table at a wedding. Don’t the grown-ups want us to play with them no more?

Smith On the contrary, they’ve entrusted in all of us . . .

Some noise, footsteps, emanating from upstairs. They briefly look up.

. . . a very serious responsibility.

Parker knocks and enters.

Parker WPC Parker, reporting.

Smith Come in.

Parker (to Henderson) You’re out of uniform, Henderson.

Smith DC Henderson has been temporarily promoted, WPC Parker.

Henderson Yes that’s – (to Smith) – temporar . . .? Right.

Parker (at Morris) Parker.

Morris Yeah we met, up in Hendon. Morris. We were in the same ballistics class.

Parker OK.

Smith So if I may have your attention?

There’s a certain amount of straightening up and standing to attention.

First off, in this office from now on, you may give your attention without ‘standing to it’. I’d like this environment to be informal. We’re going to need to be free in our thinking if we’re to succeed. So please. Relax.

The others do a relatively poor job of relaxing, but they can’t change who they are. Yet.

Secondly, these are not criminals. Their motivation is political which upgrades them to ‘terrorists’. But as our intelligence suggests, these are not of foreign descent. They are our neighbours. The people we stand next to in the street. An enemy within.

We believe we are the same age as the people we aim to catch, but the similarities end there. They see the world very differently to us. And have made very different choices as a result. They don’t understand us, and we don’t understand them. They are trying to destroy us, so we are going to catch them. And in order to catch them, we must understand them.

He begins tossing books out to the room.

We will read what they have been reading. Listen to what they listen to, go where they go, think the way they think.

Morris You want us to read, sir?

Henderson Less of the ‘sirs’, Morris, you may refer to Mister Smith as Mister Smith.

Morris I haven’t read a book since school and even then I didn’t read it.

Parker What are they, sir? – Mister Smith, sir – sorry.

Smith That’s alright, relax.

Parker I’m definitely relaxed, I’m sorry.

Morris (looking at his) You don’t see many o’ these in Menzies, do you?

Smith These books I obtained from an alternative bookshop in Camden. Hangouts for the young and disenfranchised. A range of European literature. Recall, the Heathrow bomb target was an Iberia Airlines flight. Iberia is the flag-carrying airline of Spain where such anarchistic activities have long been – active, and that particular attempt had all the hallmarks of the First of May Group – a radical urban guerrilla collective that launches attacks against the Franco regime.

Parker Why are they called First of May?

Smith I don’t know – write that down; all of you. Be sure to assemble a list of things that none of us know so that we may go off and know them.

He writes the names of these groups onto a flipchart.

In Germany, we have Baader-Meinhof, in Spain, First of May, in France, they have the Situationists. It is my inquiries into the Situationists that led me to decipher the one unidentified target listed on Communiqué 1, leading me to believe that our targets are being supplied or at least influenced by a European faction.

He turns on the slide projector. ‘Spectacles’ is displayed on the screen. Smith Spectacles.

Morris They’re not going after Dollond & Aitchison, are they?

Smith No. Although, in a way, yes. They are.

He holds up a book.

Guy Dubord. French radical, author of The Society of the Spectacle. The basic premise is that we no longer live real, truthful lives. We live a representation, an ‘imitation’, of the lives we see in advertisements, read in magazines, watch at the pictures. And this all serves to distract us. Blind us. From – real life. Real – feelings.

Parker I don’t understand, so according to this lot I’m not really alive?

Smith You are alive, Parker, yes, but you are not ‘living’. Your existence is a carbon copy of what you think it should be, whether that be marriage or a new refrigerator.

Parker I like my new fridge. I want to get married. They can jolly well bog off.

Henderson (showing her ring) I’m getting married, next summer.

Parker Awh lovely, next summer? Quite a wait.

Henderson Well, Roger has to save up, doesn’t he, and there’s so much to do.

Morris Eighteen months, me, shackled to the old ball and chain. Just had a little ’un too; little boy.

Smith And all of that, your lifestyle, that is what they are trying to ‘release’ you from. To them, you’re all living in an open prison.

Parker I’ve heard Harlesden called a lot of things, but it’s hardly a prison.

Smith Spectacles make you think you have chosen to live in Harlesden because you are unaware of the alternatives.

Parker I’m aware of them.

Smith You think you have free will but you don’t.

Parker Brent Cross. Neasden –

Smith They mean alternatives to your job, to your taxes, to your alarm clock, to your dinner times, your traditional marriage –

Henderson (stands; goes to the board of names) So all these foreign terrorist, anarchist groups, whatever –

Morris Bunch of young berks is what I’d call ’em, need a proper day’s work.

Henderson You think this lot – our lot – are the British equivalent?

Smith writes ‘The Angry Brigade’ onto the list, underneath the rest.

Smith Yes, DC Henderson. I do.

Morris (raising his hand) Question.

Smith You don’t have to raise your hand, Morris –

Morris Actually it’s two questions. (Raising his other one.)

Smith Regardless, you still don’t have to –

Morris Are you married, Mister Smith?

Henderson Morris, don’t ask a senior officer questions / about his personal –

Morris He said speak freely!

Smith It’s alright, Henderson. It’s OK.

Yes, I am married. Three years in July.

Henderson Awh, any sprogs?

Smith A young girl, yes. Elizabeth.

Morris (salutes) Like the Queen. Huh.

Smith Yes. Well.

And the second?

Morris . . . ey?

Henderson Don’t say ‘ey’, say ‘what’. I mean don’t say ‘what’, say ‘pardon’.

Morris Blimey, ‘pardon’.

Smith You said you had two questions, the first was ‘am I married’, and the second is . . .?

Morris Oh yeah, I remember. What I don’t understand is . . . what do they want? This ‘Angry’ lot. What is it that they want?

Parker To cause trouble. Hooligans, vandals, thugs –

Smith Morris has asked a very important question, though. The most important question, actually. Let us begin.

Lights down.

Lights almost instantly up.

Smith is at the flipchart drawing a diagram. A horizontal line with ‘COMMUNISM’ labelled on the left, and ‘FASCISM’ on the right.

Smith So what about socialism then? Left wing or right?

Morris is flicking through a book.

Henderson On the left.

Smith Further left than communism?

Parker Less, I’d say.

Henderson Well so would I, if I’d been allowed to –

Parker My old man, that’s what he describes himself as. Just Labour isn’t it.

Smith (writing) Yes, so about here.

Parker Not that he’s one of those whatsits, before anyone calls the secret service. God what do I mean, what are they called? Reds under the bed – that’s it. He’s just a unionist.

Smith So.

Parker Trade, not Irish.

Smith Where would we place anarchism? Then. As a political doctrine. Where do those whom we seek sit along this spectrum?

Parker Left?

Smith Right.

Parker Oh sorry then, right.

Smith No I meant ‘right’. Left. As in correct, yes.

Henderson But wait a minute let me just – (thinks) right, so anarchy is about no rules, isn’t it? No government, or big authorities. Well that’s right wing, isn’t it? ‘Small state’, ‘freedom’, that’s on the right. Socialism and communism, that’s about government controlling everything. That’s what anarchists are against, so they can’t be left.

Smith But on the right, they wish to preserve the status quo. The left aspire to a classless society. So is it a paradox?

Morris (puts his hand up) Mister Smith – sorry (puts his hand down) – Mister Smith? I think I may be able to help.

Smith offers Morris the pen. Morris stands and approaches the board, drawing.

Morris I would posit that (smiles at the others) – ‘posit’ – I would posit that the political spectrum is not a line from left to right at all, oh no, it’s a circle. When you go as far left as communism, which believes in equality and class-less-lessness, the tyranny that is required to enforce such a change moves it all the way back to right-wing fascism. The further right the further left, the further left, the further right and so on.

Henderson So where would you ‘posit’ anarchism, then, professor?

Morris I would posit-tion it – hah – erm, here.

He draws it in the middle of the circle.

Outside of the political sphere because it rejects any organised body.

Smith Very instructive, Morris.

Morris (flicking through a book) I’m quite enjoying all this, good for the old noggin.

Parker Well? What’s the answer?

Smith I’m not sure that there is one.

A phone rings. Morris answers it just as –

Smith Just ignore it.

Morris Oh. I already answered it.

Smith Fine.

Morris Should I put it down?

Smith No, you’ve answered it, just, take a message and then put it down.

Morris (into the phone) Hello?

Smith So the attack on the Minister for Employment’s house. Was it an attack on the government, or the police? Was it an attack on the Conservative government in particular, or on this individual minister –?

Morris I’m sorry, Mister Smith –

Smith Please, Morris, just put the phone down.

Morris She says it’s your wife.

Smith . . . it – (sighs) OK, I’ll – (Moving to his desk phone.)

Morris (into the phone) He says he’ll call you back.

Smith No, don’t do that, I’m here now. Transfer her through.

Morris What extension?

Smith (looking at his phone) I don’t know.

Parker (handing Morris a sheet) Here’s the new numbers.

Morris Yeah but which one’s which, they’re not labelled.

Smith Look, why don’t I – (Puts his phone down.)

Morris I’ll just try one. (Dialling.)

Smith I’ll come over there.

He’s walking over to Morris’s phone as Henderson’s phone rings.

Morris Oh sorry, I already sent her on.

Henderson (answering her phone) Hello?

Smith Henderson –

Henderson It’s your wife, sir.

Smith (moving to her) Yes I know that, give –

Henderson Let’s try again. (Pushes a button.)

Smith No, just –

The phone on Smith’s desk rings now.

Henderson There you are, see.

Smith (moving to his desk) Right. Finally. Thank you.

(Answering.) Hello.

DCS Habershon.

Meet in the Tank, yes of course. Thank you, sir, I’ll be there. (Phone down.)

You said it was my wife.

Morris It was your wife when I transferred her.

Henderson Me too.

Morris It’s like Chinese whispers with phones, isn’t it; starts off a wife one end, becomes a superintendent by the time it –

The phone rings. They look at it. Smith answers.

Smith DS Smith.

Susan.

The others busy themselves – making the final touches to their desk arrangements, making notes. Parker begins working through some files.

Smith Yes, I’m sorry, we’re all – it’s a new office and we’re somewhat fingers and thumbs . . .

I have to have a meeting with Roy – with DCS Habershon, in the Tank but I’ll be home for tea around 8 p.m.

No I won’t have a drink.

I won’t.

Parker freezes. She has seen something in her pile of papers – and removes it carefully, holding it out to the room. It’s a letter, with an address on the envelope, printed in a children’s stationery set.

Parker Sir?

Everyone freezes.

Smith . . . Susan, I’m going to have to phone you back.

He puts the phone down.

Parker Sir?

Smith Where did you find that, Parker?

Parker It was just here, in this morning’s internal post.

Smith Parker don’t move, you’re fine, but don’t move.

Parker OK.

Smith Henderson and Morris, get back. (Dialling.)

Parker Well, why are you telling them to get back if it’s fine?

Smith (on the phone) DCS Habershon please.

I know he’s in the Tank, he’s gone to meet me there, this is DS Smith. I need you to go and get him for me. I’m down in . . . I can’t tell you where I am, get him to phone me immediately.

Phone down. He removes some gloves from his drawer.

Parker Sir –?

Smith It’s alright, Parker. You’re alright.

He carefully takes the envelope from Parker.

He carefully places it down on the desk.

Morris Shouldn’t we wait for the Super, sir?

Smith Maybe it was the Super who sent it down here.

(Looking up.) Maybe it’s a test . . .

Beat. He opens the envelope carefully. He takes out the communiqué, and opens that.

He looks at the group, and then the letter.

Single side of A4. Handwritten. Penmanship is neat. Considered. Feels strangely . . . female, for some reason, I don’t know.

Labelled, Communiqué 5.

Parker It’s them . . .

Morris What does it say?

Smith . . . ‘British democracy . . . is based on more blood, terror, and exploitation . . . than any empire in history.’

‘Has a brutal police force . . . whose crimes against people the media will not report.’

Parker Crimes, what crimes, we don’t commit crimes, we stop crimes.

Smith ‘Now its government has declared vicious class war. A one-sided war . . . We have started to fight back . . .’

‘. . . With bombs.’

Scene Three

Against the darkness, another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

WE ARE NO MERCENARIES.

THE WAR WILL BE WON . . . BY THE ORGANISED WORKING CLASS.

Lights snap up on:

The Prophet, a young anarchist, sits facing Smith with Henderson and Parker.

Smith You are Albert Meltzer. Convicted of smuggling arms to Hamburg for the Spanish CNT group. Current editor of the anarchistic publication Freedom.

The Prophet I’m out of that game now. Grosvenor Square was the end of it for me.

Smith What do you mean, Grosvenor Square was the end for you?

The Prophet (smokes) Do you know why there has never been a revolution in Britain? Spain, yes, France, hell yes, America, Greece, Italy, Russia, Cuba – it’s the pillars. The pillars that hold the establishment up, they’re so old here, so sturdy, they don’t . . . wobble. I saw it in Grosvenor Square, and I knew the game was up. That’s what’s clever about you lot; the Great British police force. We cannot fight against that which will not fight back. Other countries, we charge, they charge back. But you lot. You just wouldn’t bloody do it. You just wouldn’t ruddy let go. You stand there, rigid, in your lines. Smiling. It’s as if you know. It’s as if it ran through your veins. The lines will hold. They’ve held for centuries. Nothing to see here.

Smith And you’re settled down are you now, wife, kids, job?

The Prophet (smokes a bit) There is a woman that I currently love, yes. And we have had born unto us a child. I do not however ‘work’.

Parker You live off welfare payments from the very state you once sought to destroy? Isn’t that hypocritical?

The Prophet (smokes, smiles a bit) Work exploits half your life for no reason. There are other ways to organise a society. You just don’t want to see them.

Parker You don’t want to provide for your family. Have independence.

The Prophet (laughing) And how ‘independent’ do you currently feel, love? In this room right now. How free do you think you are?

Smith . . . So. What’s the word on the street. Who’s doing this?

The Prophet Who’s doing what?

Smith You don’t know?

The Prophet Know what?

Smith Henderson.

Henderson lays down some photos on the table.

Henderson The Police Commissioner’s house. The Attorney General’s house. The Employment Minister’s house. Paddington Police Station.

The Prophet These are bombs?

Smith nods.

The Prophet Well, it looks like the Irish.

Smith It is not the Irish.

Henderson hands The Prophet a communiqué.

The Prophet takes it. And reads.

The Prophet Communiqué 6.

Our attack is violent.

Our violence is organised.

The question is not whether the revolution will be violent. No revolution was ever won without violence.

. . . The Angry Brigade.

He stops reading. And places the letter down.

He takes another cigarette from the packet, his hand shaking as he lights. A deep drag . . .

It’s happening . . .

Smith What’s happening, Albert? Tell me what’s happening; you’re quite safe.

The Prophet (laughs; and then laughs some more) I might be. But you aren’t.

Smith What does that mean? Who’s doing this, give us some names.

The Prophet These people don’t have names. I don’t know who they are and even if I did, it’s too late. They’ve already gone off the map. They don’t exist anymore. They’ve gone that one step beyond where any of us before them were willing to go.

Smith Where have they gone?

The Prophet It’s coming. To the streets of London. To the very heart of the very oldest empire in history, at last. The flames are going to rise. And you aren’t going to be able to stop them. They’ll be coming for you too, you know. All of you. You, and the people you love. You should be so afraid.

He smokes. He laughs, shaking a little still.

It’s finally time.

Lights down.

Another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

COMMUNIQUÉ 7

THE POLITICIANS, THE LEADERS, THE RICH, THE BIG BOSSES, ARE IN COMMAND . . .

THEY CONTROL.

WE, THE PEOPLE, SUFFER

Lights up.

The Model, ‘ Miss United Kingdom’, sits facing Smith with Henderson and Morris. She is slightly frazzled – her crown and sash singed – and has traces of flour over her. She blows her nose.

The Model I mean what they got against me, ey? I ain’t done nothing wrong, no one’s ever had anything against me.

Henderson It must have been quite the trauma, I’m sorry.

The Model Yeah, too bloody right.

Henderson Did you see anyone behaving suspiciously? Before, during or after?

The Model It’s a bloody beauty pageant, everyone’s behaving suspiciously. Why would they want to hurt me? Everyone’s always liked me. Ever since school.

Smith We’re actually not talking about the feminist protestors who threw flour over you from the box. We’re talking about –

The Model What was all that about, with the flour? Not a bloody cake, am I? Don’t need self-raising, do I? Big enough as they are, these, aren’t they? Bloody flour. No respect, that’s this lot’s problem.

Henderson We’re talking about the blast outside the Albert Hall.

The Model Who was it? The Irish? My mum, she warned me, she said ‘It’s the Royal Albert Hall, they’ll have that, one of these days, the Irish’ but I didn’t listen.

Henderson Were you anywhere near the vicinity of the blast?

The Model I was onstage, and Bob Hope was there talking – Bob bloody Hope! – and we heard the explosion outside.

Smith They planted the incendiary device in a BBC broadcast van.

The Model Those bra-burning butch bloody lesbians, they wanna get a life, wanna slap a bit of lippy on and stop being so bloody mardy. Fat ugly cows.

Lights down.

Another communique.

We must ATTACK.

Lights up in the basement office again.

The Snitch, a highly-strung, fidgeting prison inmate in uniform, sits opposite.

The Snitch Guarantees.

Smith Hello, Brian.

The Snitch That’s what I want. Guarantees.

Smith To maintain confidentiality – we shall herewith refer to you as ‘Prisoner A’.

The Snitch (tapping) Written down, stamped and whathaveyou.

Smith Can you at least state for the tape that you are here of your own –

The Snitch Is that thing on?! I was told it wouldn’t be on, turn it off.

Smith You’re currently incarcerated for handling stolen items, is that correct?

The Snitch Hot goods, yeah that’s right, you know it is.

Smith Residing in Brixton, serving three years?

The Snitch (to the others, gesturing Smith) It were him what done me. You’re on the up and up, aren’t you, blimey. He were just a plod when he put cuffs on me.

Smith You have some information relating to our current investigation?

The Snitch I want that off. I mean it. You don’t know who you’re dealing with here. You haven’t got the first foggiest, mate. I’m shtum as your mum until that thing clicks a clear one, do you understand?

Smith . . . most of it. Henderson?

Henderson (stands) Yes, Mister Smith?

The Snitch Oh ‘Mister Smith’ is it now, very nice.

Smith Turn off the machine.

Henderson I don’t recommend that, Mister Smith.

Smith Henderson. Turn off the machine.

Beat. Henderson stands and approaches the tape recorder.

Beat. She presses stop.

The Snitch The whatsit. Inside.

Smith The cassette tape.

The Snitch Cassette yeah. Out. I want it out.

Henderson takes opens the recorder, removes the tape, closes the recorder.

The Snitch In the corner or something. Away from the – thing.

Smith Don’t be a silly billy now, Prisoner A.

The Snitch Well, fine then I don’t talk, up to you.

Smith . . . Henderson.

Beat. Henderson starts pulling the tape out of the cassette. Pulling and pulling.

She rips off the strand, and places the tape in the bin.

Silence.

The Snitch So I’m on my bunk, just lying there, Monday night it was, the one before last, new shipment comes in, I know I’m getting someone underneath me, don’t know who, don’t care, I keep myself to myself, only this one, he wouldn’t let me, gabble gabble gabble, know what I mean, soon as he was in, door closed, puts his bag on the bed, toothbrush in the glass by the mirror, bosh, and he’s off, ‘What’s your name, what you in for’, I couldn’t tell whether he was nosy or nervous, I just buried me head in my paper, but he couldn’t help himself, pulled up he says on some cheques that didn’t clear or that he forged or that he stole I don’t know check it out, I’m not gonna do your whole job for you, anyway he says that’s what the Old Bill got him on but that they don’t know the half of what he’s into, he says he’s got himself mixed up with this, like, set, like, group, like, bunch of thingymajigs, up West somewhere, around Notting whatsit, living together like you know, they do, some of ’em, in these places they don’t even own –

Smith How many?

The Snitch Well, loads of ’em, but he says there’s, there’s like, what would you say, like, erm, like a breakaway ‘cell’ or something, a small group of them. Group of four.

Smith Four?

The Snitch Yeah. Two lads, two birds. And that they’re planning something. Planning some ‘terror’.

Smith ‘Terror’.

The Snitch Yeah. And that they’re starting. That they’ve already started.

Smith What targets?

The Snitch So am I getting time off, then, or what?

Smith What targets?

The Snitch Good behaviour, all that?

Smith Not unless we can verify –

The Snitch The Albert Hall.

They said they was gonna blow up the Albert Hall.

Smith lifts a box onto the table, removes the lid, and begins removing the contents, all sealed in plastic bags.

Smith This new cell mate of yours, his name is Jake Prescott, correct?

The Snitch 10–4, sergeant, yes, sir.

Smith The evidence you have acquired here –

The Snitch Right so yeah here’s the situation, old gobshite was put on kitchen duty at 1 o’clock, that’s when I bung all this in that box and they brought me over here to talk to you. (At his watch.) They aren’t gonna be able to keep him there beyond 5 cause it’s cell inspection then, if he ain’t sent back he’ll get suspicious, and worse if he comes back early and I’m not there and his stuff’s not there, you can say bye bye to me for sure.

Smith His toothbrush.

The Snitch Yep. (Taps his nose.) For fingerprints, I thought.

Smith And sputum.

The Snitch Sputum?

Snitch Spit, from the suspect’s gob, Prisoner A.

Removes another item.

A notebook.

The Snitch Ho-ho-ho. No. No, Mister Sergeant Detective Arresting Officer Smith Sir. That ain’t just a notebook. That is an address book.

Pause.

Smith Parker.

Parker (standing) Yes, Mister Smith.

Smith Transcribe everything in this book for our records.

The Snitch Well, hold on, the time –

Smith We will have Prisoner A and these items back in place before Prescott returns at 5 p.m. You have done a real duty to your country today, sir.

The Snitch Oh yeah, lovely, I’m all warm inside; when can you get me out?

Smith That’s up to the parole board.

The Snitch Do one. The lot of you –

Smith, Henderson and Parker make to leave.

Henderson stops. And turns to face The Snitch.

Henderson What is he like?

This chap. Mister Prescott.

What kind of man is he?

The Snitch He’s young. Got ideas. About the world. Thinks he can change it. He’s very clever, I can tell that much. Educated. Expensively, is my guess. If they’re all like that, you’re gonna have a right old job catching ’em, I’ll say that much.

If they’re all that clever, to be honest . . . I don’t think any of us stand a chance.

Lights down.

Scene Four

Another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

WE ARE SLOWLY DESTROYING THE LONG TENTACLES OF THE STATE MACHINE . . .

168 EXPLOSIONS LAST YEAR . . .

A big flow chart of photographs of young people, their names, and lines linking them to one another. There is also a map of London, with squats highlighted – Powis Square, Grosvenor Avenue and Lavender Hill.

Smith addresses Parker and Henderson.

Smith That’s thirteen radicals from the Prescott address book currently in custody, then, pulled in from various squats around the capital. Our most productive haul being Grosvenor Avenue.

(Holding up a file.) Their fingerprints back from the lab. No match with the communiqués.

(Holding up another.) Their sputum also. No match. Nevertheless the first steps on our association map that will inevitably, I am – sure, will lead to the culprits’ capture.

Morris enters.

Morris I’ve got bad news, Smith –

Smith There is no bad news in criminal investigations, Morris, only the inevitable discovery of solvable challenges.

Morris I’ve got a bad discovery of a solvable challenge,

Smith. (Handing him a newspaper.) The press blackout’s done a long walk off a short pier; Daily Mirror’s gone and blabbed.

Smith A £10,000 reward for anyone with information leading to the arrest of the Angry Brigade. Blast.

Parker Ten grand?

Smith Bring this chap in, the journalist. We get the boys upstairs to contact the editors, we must lock this down as best we can.

He holds up an evidence bag.

Obtained from the squats. Cheque books – stolen, presumably, none of the names match up with those in custody. Send them over to Fraud.

Morris Sir.

Smith holds up another evidence bag.

Smith A set of car keys. Discovered to be a blue Ford parked on Highbury Grove. Inside the car –

Holds up a bag.

– was this bag. Inside the bag –

Holds up a smaller bag.

– was this smaller bag. And inside this bag –

Holds up a wallet.

Morris It’s like The Generation Game.

Smith – was this wallet, and inside this wallet –

Morris A cuddly toy!

Smith – was this small key. We are yet to establish what this key opens – Parker, you be in charge of that. Find out what it opens, find out what’s inside.

Parker Where do I start?

Smith (sighing, looking at a map of London) Where indeed. What connects these places, what lures our types of target towards them? Powis Square, Grovsenor Avenue, Lavender Hill.

Morris Nothing. It’s wherever they can kip for free, innit.

Smith No. No it isn’t. We need to think outside the box.

Morris We are, sir. I haven’t thought inside a box for as long as I can remember –

Smith We’re not looking at the city correctly. What’s the pattern? Where are the dots – a squat here, a squat there, is there a pattern, is there a shape, because somewhere here, on this London map, a dot is missing. And that dot houses the four anarchists who have gone far beyond the layabouts we have in custody.

You know, I’ve been reading up on a little thing called ‘psychogeography’. We are caged in by our city, by the grid structures, the ‘oppressive’ buildings, by its function and its form. It’s a way of seeing your urban surroundings differently. Topsy-turvy, upside down, ‘freeing’ yourself of its rigidness.

Morris Psychotic geography.

Smith Psychogeography.

Morris I stand by mine.

Smith (at the map) There’s something underneath it. A pattern . . .

Beat. He looks a them. Tries to perch, casually, on his desk . . . offering it out to the room.

What do you make of them? Some of the – young men and women, our contemporaries, we have in custody. Any – thoughts, any – feelings? Observations.

Beat.

Parker I’ve got one – no, I don’t actually, it’s fine – actually no, I do have one.

Smith Good, good.

Parker Well, when we – when we stormed the squats.

(Beat, trying to laugh.) Not like my house, I can tell you, no . . . No.

Smith Go on.

Parker All those people. And men. And women. And . . . women and women. And men and men.

And . . . and the baby. Little crying baby, being looked after by a dozen different mothers. A dozen different fathers. Pretending they’re like some sort of family, but that’s not a family, is it, not a family I recognise and I just, I just think, I don’t know, I think it’s rotten if I’m honest and it’s doing my head in, it’s making me – I don’t know, I don’t know.

Smith It’s alright, Parker. You’re right to be . . . to feel that way. That’s the correct response.

Everyone. Take a chair.

Morris You what?

Smith (bringing a chair out from his desk) Bring out your chair, like this. Look at it. It feels like there is only one way to sit on it, right? The way in which it was designed for you to sit. (Demonstrating.) But there isn’t. There are hundreds.

Morris Hundreds?

Smith Hundreds. Try one. Try one.

Morris uncertainly moves to the chair, looking at it. He reverses and sits, straddling it.

Smith See? What do you think? What feels different?

Morris I don’t know.

Smith Even the obvious, just say the obvious.

Morris The . . . the back bits at my front.

Smith The back is at the front. The back. Has become the front. Good.

Let’s all try it.

He takes his chair, as do Parker and Henderson. They begin trying increasingly radical ways to sit on the chair. Which takes as long as it takes.

Smith (from his position) Now look. Look at the world from here. This is an angle from which the world was not meant to be seen. What does it feel like?

Morris Like backache.

Smith Apart from that.

Henderson New. It feels new. Like anything is possible . . .

Smith stands. The others follow, after a moment.

Beat, looking at one another.

Smith OK, we, we continue drawing connections between our suspects, continue the raids on the squats.

They get back to normal. Parker and Morris exit.

Smith gathers up some files – seeing a holiday brochure he slipped in there. He holds it up wearily.

Smith Know anything about . . . about Spain? Henderson?

(Referencing his brochure.) My Susan. Wants us to go away. She’s joined this bridge club and everyone’s talking about Spain, apparently. Apparently, that’s where everyone is going.

Henderson Roger and me, we were round my sister’s in Haringey and she brought out this funny-shaped bottle of pink wine. Matruvius or something?

Smith Ah yes, Mateus.

Henderson Mateus, yes.

Smith Yes, Susan’s had us sampling that. A ‘rosé’ – mix of red and white.

Henderson (laughing) Who thinks of these things?

Smith Though I do believe that’s Portuguese.

Henderson (looking at the photos) All of them . . . being young and all that . . . they’re quite attractive, aren’t they.

Smith Attractive.

Henderson Just because they’re young, I mean. In any other light, if they had made different choices in life, I mean.

Well, I’ll let you look at your holiday brochures.

Smith Will you be going anywhere this year?

Henderson Same as always, Margate with Roger’s family.

(She begins to leave. Stops.) Sometimes I think I hate them.

Smith . . . I’m sorry.

Henderson . . . I don’t know. I’ve never . . . told that to . . . even myself.

I’ll see you tomorrow.

She leaves at speed. Smith watches the door for a while.

He checks his watch. He goes back to the brochure.

The phone rings. He answers.

Smith Smith.

Voice (female, off) You’re looking for me.

Smith I’m sorry, who is this?

Voice You’re looking for me. Hello.

Smith How did you get this number?

Voice Have you not been watching us? We can find anyone. We’re getting closer . . .

Smith Now listen here –

Voice Recently Promoted Detective Sergeant Robert Daniel Smith.

Did you have a nice birthday?

Did your colleagues bring in a cake?

Smith I did not inform . . . now, look. No one else needs to get hurt –

Voice We haven’t hurt anybody. Yet.

Smith You’re throwing your lives away, turn yourself in.

Voice What do you dream about? At night?

I can hear it in your voice. A longing, contained. A longing for something else.

Smith A . . . I . . .

Voice It’s alright. Robert Daniel. It’s human . . .

Smith Where are you?

Voice Look for me.

Smith I am looking –

Voice No, you’re searching, but you’re not seeing.

Smith This isn’t a game.

Voice No. It isn’t.

The phone line goes dead.

Suddenly, Smith hears some footsteps upstairs – gaining in pace. People running. It sounds like a thunderstorm, growing louder and louder . . .

Blackout – followed by the sound of an explosion.

Another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

THE AB IS THE MAN OR WOMAN SITTING NEXT TO YOU.

THEY HAVE GUNS IN THEIR POCKETS AND ANGER IN THEIR MINDS.

WE ARE GETTING CLOSER.

Scene Five

The basement office.

Henderson Attacks on the Ford Motor company in Gants Hill. The Territorial Army recruitment base. Our own police computer at Tintagel. And the Post Office Tower in Central London.

Smith . . . Why? Why these? – Go.

Morris No idea why Ford, my father drives a Ford, they’re good cars.

Parker Read the news, Morris. Unions on strike over pay.

Henderson Territorial Army base. Sending soldiers off to fight and die in wars they don’t believe in. The police computer, containing records of criminals they probably believe to be innocent. The Post Office Tower – no idea.

Parker Because it’s ugly, I wouldn’t be sad to see that go.

Henderson Parker.

Parker Yes, DC Henderson, can I help you?

The key found in the squatters’ car on Grosvenor Avenue. Analysts have tracked the key makers down, it’s for a locker. Euston Train Station.

Smith Euston – excellent, we go and try every locker door in that station, retrieve the contents, and then we stake out that location around the clock, see if someone comes to find their stuff.

Parker On my way, Smith –

Smith Not you, Parker.

Parker You said we should –

Smith We, the royal ‘we’. There are men for that, Parker – we can’t be doing the beat work, the bread and butter policing –

Parker I like the bread and butter policing –

Henderson We’ve got to be above all that, looking down, at the bigger picture, right, Smith.

The phone rings. Smith answers.

Smith Hello.

Yes, sir.

More suspects, which squat? I’m coming up with my team to interview –

Well, who is interviewing them?

Sir, I really think we’re the best people to . . . We’re really beginning to understand the –

Yes, sir.

Phone down.

Parker More arrests?

Smith How are we supposed to catch these people if they won’t trust us to . . .

Beat. He takes a breath, and goes to a record player. He removes the sleeve of a record – The Deviants’ ‘I’m Coming Home’. He places it onto a record player and plays.

Morris Sir?

Smith I know it’s hard.

Morris Stone the crows, is this meant to be music?

Smith This is what they hear. These, these are the keys to unlock it.

Parker Haven’t you got anything a bit more –

Smith No more half measures. Right? If we’re doing it, if we’re getting into their heads. Then let’s get into them.

Take your ties off.

Morris My tie?

Smith Yes. All of you. (Taking off his tie.) That’s an order.

Lights.

The basement office.

Henderson is watching a clip from To Catch a Thief – romantic and noir, a scene between Cary Grant and Grace Kelly, the hunter and the hunted . . .

The basement office.

Morris is sat listening to a Ton Steine Scherben record on the player.

The basement office.

Parker is watching a clip from an adult film – the sound of orgasm. She looks in pain watching it.

The basement office.

Smith stands at the map, studying it, moving his finger around it, drawing patterns . . .

The sound of footsteps above him, growing louder, almost tormenting him . . .

Scene Six

Another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

IF YOU ARE NOT BUSY BEING BORN, YOU ARE BUSY BUYING.

ALL THE SALES GIRLS IN THE FLASH BOUTIQUES ARE MADE TO DRESS THE SAME AND HAVE THE SAME MAKE-UP . . .

LIFE IS SO BORING THERE IS NOTHING LEFT TO DO EXCEPT SPEND ALL OUR WAGES . . .

The basement office.

The Manager sits, dishevelled and black-faced, opposite Smith with Henderson and Parker.

The Manager I’m sorry.

Henderson It’s alright, you’ve had a shock.

The Manager I’m in shock, ye–, it . . . it’s very shocking.

Smith Do you know what happened?

The Manager There was, there was, there was a, a bomb –

Henderson Yes. Can we get you anything, what do you need –

The Manager Need? Need? I need to, I don’t know, hahaha, I feel I need to scream, actually, hahaha.

Henderson Whatever you need –

The Manager screams, long and loud. He stops.

The Manager Sorry.

Henderson That’s alright.

The Manager screams again, shorter this time.

The Manager Fucking, ’scuse me, fucking fuckers. The entire autumn line, gone up in, in smoke.

Smith You own the shop –?

The Manager Manager – own?! Pah, Hahah. Own, he says. Manage.

Smith Manage, Biba on Kensington High Street. Biba is a fashion boutique.

The Manager Where do you get this lot from? YES! Biba is a ‘fashion boutique’.

Smith Do you have any inclination as to why you were a target?

The Manager Well, that’s your bloody job to find out, isn’t it? Look at me. Who are these people, tell me! Tell me! WHO ARE THESE PEOPLE?

Lights down.

Another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

BROTHERS AND SISTERS, WHAT ARE YOUR REAL DESIRES?

SIT IN THE DRUGSTORE, LOOK DISTANT, EMPTY, BORED, DRINKING SOME TASTELESS COFEE.

OR PERHAPS . . .

BLOW IT UP OR BURN IT DOWN.

Lights up on the basement office again.

The Girl is sat opposite Smith, and Henderson and Morris. She smokes. Her legs crossed.

Morris It’s alright, there’s no need to be alarmed. Just speak calmly and clearly.

The Girl I met this guy. In a bookshop. He was German. I liked his accent. We went for coffee.

Smith Did you get his name?

The Girl He said it was Wolfgang.

(Smokes.) We . . . ‘hung out’. Smoked and listened to music and talked about the world. Me, a good Home Counties girl. He had friends, so many friends, that were always just . . . there.

Morris And Wolfgang asked you to collect his belongings from Euston Station.

The Girl He said he’d lost his key. But that if I went to the manager’s office with the documents he would let me in.

Smith What had you expected to find in there?

The Girl Clothes, Wolfgang said.

Smith Not dynamite?

The Girl No. Not dynamite.

She smokes.

Morris (taking address book) Address book, too. This yours? (She shakes her head.) Mind if I . . .? (He starts flicking through it.)

Smith Why do you think that when we returned you to the . . . ‘property’. That it was completely deserted?

The Girl . . . Because he’s left me.

Smith And why do you think he left you?

The Girl Because he was watching me with the locker. And saw me get caught.

Smith And why do you think he was watching you?

Beat.

The Girl (suddenly upset) Because he was using me . . .

Silence. She smokes.

Smith Some of these friends. Do you remember any of them? We’re looking for a particular set of four. Two men. Two women. Who may have looked or behaved differently to the others.

The Girl They all behaved differently. And they can all go to hell.

Lights down.

Another communiqué lights up on the projection screen.

WE BUILD PRISONS AND THEN WE LIVE IN THEM.

WE PRODUCE SHIT AND THEN WE EAT IT.

FROM THIS MOMENT, DESPAIR ENDS AND TACTICS BEGIN.

THE BRIGADE IS EVERYWHERE.

THE BRIGADE IS ANGRY.

Lights up on the basement office again.

The Prophet again. He sits opposite Smith with Henderson and Parker.

Smith I’m disappointed, Albert. I believed you, when you said you’d changed. And yet there you were. In this address book we found in a locker. Under a different address to the one you gave us. Harbouring fraudulent cheques. To fund . . . what? Albert? You haven’t crossed back into ‘normal life’ at all. At all.

The Prophet . . .

Smith Who are the Angry Brigade? Names.

The Prophet ‘Which way will you point your gun when the officers order you against the people of your own town?’

Smith I’m not authorised for weapons handling. Names.

Beat. He hits the table.

Names!

The Prophet It’s nice to see fire in your belly. Blood running through your veins. But where’s the blood running to, your head?

Smith Mister Meltzer –

The Prophet Or ‘down there’ – hooh, has it not run down there for quite some time, does it even know where it’s going?

Henderson You already have a caution for –

The Prophet But what to do with that new flicker of life, where to channel it? Sex with your wife?

Henderson (standing) That’s enough.

The Prophet In the ‘usual’ position, mmm? With the lights off –

Henderson marches over to the table and turns off the tape recorder.

Henderson I am terminating this interview at (she checks her watch), at –

The Prophet At? At? Yes, keep hold of those crutches, time, dates, routines, how else will you maintain your balance?

Henderson You know what gets my goat most about you people?!

Smith Henderson –

Henderson All that you were given in life, such privileges, such education, all being wasted to live like, like wasters –

The Prophet That education was not wasted. It will be used in the war.

Henderson War?! A war has armies, where’s your army?

The Prophet It’s a war of ideas.

Henderson (mocking) Ideas? Oh no, the ideas are coming, everyone duck.

The Prophet In the future, there’ll no longer be wars between countries, because there will be no countries, just companies and customers. So all wars will be between opposing ideas. And if you don’t have any, then you’ll already be dead. You’re already dead NOW!

Lights down.

Another explosion.

Scene Seven

The basement office – looking much less tidy and rigid. Smith, Parker and Henderson.

Smith (on the phone) Sir, please – just give me more time with those in custody, all of them. Don’t – no, I don’t, with respect, sir, I don’t want the ham-fisted PC Plods in your department charging in there and bungling it up; we’re getting inside their heads, it’s working, just give me more time.

I apologise if that sounded . . .

Yes, sir.

He puts the phone down, and flicks a desk or equivalent. Angry . . .

God dammit . . .

They’re just using us . . . They want to take all the credit themselves.

Henderson Credit for what? We don’t have anything. We’ve arrested every young radical in the city, practically, except the four we’re actually looking for –

Morris bursts in.

Morris (holding aloft a file) We have names!

Parker What?

Morris I cross-referenced the names in Prescott’s address book with the Euston locker one, narrowing it down to those we have so far had zero contact with; I cross-referenced – see, sir, lines, weaving a web – I cross-referenced those with open cases of political activists nationwide and came up with case CH 1589TK, four individuals arrested in a pub south of Manchester for suspicious behaviour, fraudulent documents found on their person, no-shows at the court hearing in Colchester and have not been seen since –

He smiles, whacking four large photographs in the centre of the board.

John Barker. Hilary Creek. Jim Greenfield. Anna Mendelson. I think it’s them. I think it’s the Angry Brigade. He hands Smith four files.

Smith Circulate these images to every department, also every single estate agent and post office inside the Greater London area.

Parker Every –? Why?

Henderson Post office because it’s the one thing we know that they do on a regular basis, after all we receive the ruddy things –

Morris And estate agent?

Smith We’ve raided every commune and every squat known to us in the capital. Did it ever occur to you that they may actually be living legally, renting somewhere ‘above’ ground? ‘The Angry Brigade is the person sitting next to you.’ Go.

They all exit, bar Smith who turns to the map, the dots.

Smith Where are you? Come on . . . where are you?

The phone rings. He answers.

Smith Smith.

Voice (female, off) Having fun?

Smith . . . hello.

Voice I hope your wife isn’t a fan of Biba. Sorry if so.

Smith I’m glad that you called again.

Voice We’re getting closer.

Smith So are we, Hilary.

Pause.

Or is it Anna?

Anna Mendelson.

It’s Anna, isn’t it?

Anna No.

Smith I think it is.

Anna . . . we don’t have names.

Smith You did. Anna Mendelson from Stockport. Studied English at Essex University. Parents Maurice and Tina. Was Head Girl at school, won a prize for drawing. Played in the school band.

You did have a name, Anna. You had a family. You had a life. A future –

I can save you. You can live –

Anna What makes you think I want saving?

Smith You want a normal life, free. Family. Children. Love. I can tell –

Anna You can’t tell that.

Smith I can.

Anna How?

Smith Because you’re the one that keeps calling me.

Silence.

The phone goes dead.

Smith stands. He smiles. He takes something out of his pocket. A spliff.

He lights the spliff. Smokes. Turns on some music. Hawkwind’s ‘Paranoia’.

He begins drawing his finger around the map again, searching –

Smith Archway . . . Holloway . . . Finchley . . . Finsbury . . . Farringdon . . . Kennington . . . Kensington . . . Islington . . . Islington . . . Dalston . . . Hackney . . . Dalston . . . Hackney . . .

The music building . . .

Scene Eight

The basement office.

Smith HACKNEY!

Parker What?

Henderson How do you know?

Smith Hackney, Dalston, Stoke Newington, London Fields . . . somewhere, somewhere here. These stars here are all the phone boxes we traced Anna’s calls from, look at the pattern.

Morris There isn’t one.

Smith Feel one, look! Not in the location of the boxes themselves but in the lines that lead towards them. Imagine! –

He stands in the middle of the room, pretending to hold a gun.

If I stood in a room with a gun and spun, firing shots into the wall. Looking at the walls you would see no discernible pattern. But the trajectories that each of the bullets travelled in to reach them, like a spider web of invisible lines, would all lead back to this spot I am standing in now.

The phone rings. He answers.

Smith Yeah?

Post office? Whereabouts?!

Doing what, posting what, what was it?

He listens, then punches the air, slamming the phone down.

STOKE NEWINGTON!

Henderson What?

Smith Post office! Recorded sighting a woman matching who but Anna Mendelson’s photograph coming to post a letter this morning! The post mistress has it. I knew it! She’s struggling to stay underground, she wants contact with the real world, that’s how we’re going to get her, she almost wants it.

Henderson Wants what?

Smith To be caught.

Parker (with the phone) I’ll send a car to retrieve the letter and match fingerprints.

Morris Sputum, on the envelope as well!

Smith (on his own phone) All constables and plain clothes in patrol and on the beat in H, N and K division, send a message out, four suspects known to be in the area, do not approach if spotted, call in immediately. (Phone down.)

Henderson Well done, Smith! We’re so close!

Morris Haul ’em in! The whole cell whoow!

Smith turns the music up, and it becomes deafening.

Parker finishes her call and joins the others with the map.

Smith lights a spliff and offers it to Henderson. After consideration, she takes it and smokes.

Morris jumps about dancing to the music. He puts his arms around Smith and Henderson and they group hug, close.

Smith is looking at Henderson. They kiss.

A beat. They kiss again.

Morris stops. Watches. He leans in and kisses Henderson.

Smith kisses Parker.

Henderson moves Parker away from Smith. Beat.

Henderson kisses Parker.

Parker detaches herself and moves away.

Smith grabs Henderson and they kiss, moving on the desk, pushing things over. Morris joins in, kissing Henderson, kissing Smith, ripping each other’s clothes off.

The music grows louder. The lights flicker.

Parker watches, holding herself, struggling . . . as the three rip into each other passionately. She runs out.

They continue.

A phone rings. And rings. Smith pulls himself out of the tryst, grabbing the phone.

Smith YES?!

Beat. He kicks the music off.

DO NOTHING UNTIL I’M THERE.

He puts the phone down, picks it up again, dials.

Henderson What . . . what is it? (Noticing Morris on top of her.) Morris . . .

Morris (sheepishly getting off, pulling at his clothes) Henderson.

Smith puts the phone down, they snatch their things, pulling their shoes on.

Smith 359 Amhurst Road, Stoke Newington, patrol car spotted John Barker entering the property seven minutes ago, other three suspects believed to be inside.

Darkness.

The words of communiqués flicker and travel about the space.

The sound of punk rock, pornographic orgasms and explosions building.

The kicking of doors, shouting, torchlight flooding into the darkness.

Smith POLICE, YOU’RE UNDER ARREST!

A torchlight hits Anna.

Smith holds the torch. He lowers it.

They stare at each other.

Blackout.



The Brigade

Anna It feels right, here.

Jim I know.

Anna Like we’re – I don’t know, like something special could happen here, in this house. Does that sound –

Jim No.

Anna Silly, or –?

Jim No. It doesn’t. No, it’s –

Anna Why don’t – do you know what we should do, we should leave all the doors open.

Jim What do you – oh right, like –

Anna I just mean a house where no door is ever closed, why are we closing them?

Jim I don’t know, no you’re right, that’s a good idea.

Anna What are we hiding; are we embarrassed? I’m not embarrassed, why should I be embarrassed?

Jim You shouldn’t be embarrassed.

Anna Worse than that actually, it’s shame, we’re ashamed of the perfectly natural things that humans do to be human that we want to hide away. Am I embarrassed of my body, because it doesn’t look like the bodies in magazines, do I not want people to see the way I look when I sleep; people need to sleep.

Jim It’s for – they think it’s for privacy, don’t they. To be with their thoughts, or –

Anna Privacy isn’t a space. It’s a state of mind.

Jim It – yep. Sorry.

Anna What for, we’re not arguing, we’re just talking.

Jim I know I just feel – I meant of course that makes perfect sense, I get –

Anna What?

Jim Nothing, I wish I thought the way you thought sometimes that’s all, it doesn’t matter, doors.

Anna Doors.

Jim Open . . . hold on, then.

Anna My God.

Jim What?

Anna Your eyes.

Jim . . .

Anna How can you be given eyes like that, when other people just get dead stones. It isn’t fair, I can hardly bear it.

Jim I don’t know.

Anna What were you going to say?

Jim Erm. I don’t remem – the doors. If we’re – do we – why do we even need doors?

Anna Exactly.

Jim No but I mean why do we even need the doors, then? Why don’t we rip ’em off? We could burn ’em actually.

Anna Well then bugger it, the walls.

Jim The walls.

Anna Let’s / knock down the walls.

Jim Knock down the walls.

Anna The walls, that’s brilliant, who decided there should be walls? Is it safe, to do that?

Jim You just have to tap it and listen, see if it’s structural.

Anna That’s what we’re doing – that’s brilliant, we should write that down.

Jim Write what down?

Anna We’re tapping on this country’s structural walls, seeing which ones if removed would bring the whole thing down.

Jim Yeah you should write it down. Don’t though.

Anna I won’t.

Jim Sometimes I’ve seen you writing letters.

Anna I don’t post them.

Jim You can’t, Anna.

Anna They’re just for me. It feels like contact if I just write the letter and throw it away.

Jim I get – sometimes I get . . . nothing.

Anna You have – doubts?

Jim No.

Anna Not about the reasons why, about what has to change, in the world, just about – what we’re doing and how we’re doing it.

Jim It’s just the . . . the, erm –

Anna The no-turning-backness. Of it.

Jim Maybe.

Anna I know.

Jim If we got caught –

Anna Yeah.

Jim John said . . . we would represent ourselves, in any trial, no lawyers.

Anna Yeah, what do lawyers know about justice. What do they know about us, they’re part of the problem –

Jim I probably wouldn’t. I’m just saying. I probably wouldn’t represent myself.

Anna . . . It, it’s not too late to – I’d be heartbroken, but it’s not too –

Jim I haven’t changed my mind, I haven’t. I just sometimes get . . . around John.

Anna What?

Jim And you. Your level of – what’s the word, when you have words to describe something well, like –

Anna Articulate.

Jim Articulate – so, see, I couldn’t even articulate the word articulate, that’s how inarticulate I am sometimes and it, it, sometimes it scares me.

Anna Don’t be scared.

Jim I shouldn’t have dropped out of Cambridge, that was stupid. Should have stayed, learned.

Anna See you went to Cambridge, they don’t let inarticulate people into Cambridge.

Jim It’s politics.

Anna Everything is politics.

Jim Everything is political, not everything is politics.

Anna That was artic – . . . see! Jim, that was articulate.

Jim That was John. He said that, not me, I just . . . I only ever just –

Anna No.

Jim – really.

Working-class quota, that’s what got me in, box ticking.

Anna You worked hard.

Jim . . . I did work hard.

Anna Don’t be scared.

Jim Scared’s the wrong word. Fucks me off, that’s the right word. Your private schools. You, John and Hil.

Anna It isn’t your fault.

Jim I really love this, talking to you, you’re brilliant.

Anna I love you.

Jim I love you.

Anna I love you. Do you think people will die?

Jim I don’t know.

Anna I remember my mother. I remember this one conversation we had in a Wendy house at the bottom of our garden.

Jim Did you know that Wendy house comes from Peter Pan, the place for Wendy to go and look after the erm the erm the Lost Boys –

Anna And cook and clean and be the archetypal mother role in an oppressively misogynistic society, yes I did know that but I didn’t know it at the time, so give me a break, I liked the little curtains with the flowers.

Jim And it was your own space.

Anna Away from the grown-ups.

Jim Where you could be as naughty as you liked.

Anna I’d hit a girl at school because she was being mean to me, she was always being mean to me. I’d had some, uh, some . . . problems around that, at school, sometimes, they made me see someone, a couple of times –

Jim See –? What kind of –

Anna It doesn’t matter really, anyway, I’d hit a girl and the school had called my mum and she came home and I was in the Wendy house. And she came in and said. She told me that violence never solved anything.

And I’m just saying that to put that there so that it’s there, so that it’s been said.

Jim OK. Well here’s my response to that, Anna.

I remember my mum. My mum was a good woman, I remember watching my mum doing the ironing. Ironing is not on the surface a particularly violent act but I would watch her and something would make me all, I don’t know, queasy and uneasy about it. But in those, erm, rigid and repressive traditions that assign individuals ancient gender roles that saw my father sat in his armchair watching the flickering box, fat on the food that my mum had just cooked while behind him she ran an iron over his shirts, perfectly happy and unquestioningly because the ant doesn’t question the crumb she is lifting to take back to the farm, the fact is that it made the five-, eight-, whatever year-old me queasy because what I was watching was one of the most violent acts I could imagine. No I know there wasn’t any blood, there weren’t any bullets being fired no bones snapping or people screaming but in the hissing of that iron – hisssssssssssssssssss – and in the fabric of I don’t know the old shaggy carpet on the floor and the patterned paper on our walls in the two-up two-down terraced box we lived in in our ‘open prison’ that is the north of England – in all of that, there are silent, invisible, but real, BOMBS going off. Every second of every minute of every day.

There is violence in the five-day week, and in the illusion that the weekend means you’re free, but the weekend is just parole, nothing more. There is the violence in the boredom and the inactivity of the unemployed. There is violence in the long streets of houses – boxes for the workers, cells for the inmates, the illusion of freedom this space gives us, like the free-range chicken who wrongly equates having more soil to trample around on with escaping the axe. There is violence in the road grid of the city, in the rapid transit systems that take us to and from our prison-cell homes to the bee hive. There is violence in the boy dressed in blue and the girl dressed in pink. There is violence, Anna, in the boy who is given a train set, and the girl who is given a Wendy house.

So with the greatest of respect to your mum, and her theory about violence, and I am sure that she is lovely, I am, but fuck your mum. Because there is more violence in her statement than on the streets of Paris. On the streets of Germany and on the streets of Madrid. And, very soon, on the streets of London. The blood that pours out of that sentence is awful. It’s awful.

Anna Maybe we could get rid of the stairs as well.

Jim We need the stairs to get upstairs.

Anna Maybe fuck upstairs.

Jim Maybe fuck upstairs. But no, we need them.

Hilary Shit.

Anna I know, are you cross, don’t be cross.

Hilary It’s a toilet.

Jim Yeah.

Hilary What’s it doing there?

Jim Nothing, just being a toilet.

Hilary In the middle of the room.

Anna It didn’t used to be in the middle of the room, there used to be walls around it, Jim knocked them down.

Jim It’s safe.

Anna No rooms, Hil, right? Then no one gets the biggest, and no one gets the smallest, we’re just, we’re just here.

Hilary John?

Anna John?

John . . . Yeah.

Anna Yeah.

John Yeah.

Hilary I don’t think we’re getting our deposit back.

John He was a cunt anyway.

Anna Who was?

Hilary (as estate agent) ‘359 Amhurst Road. Is this your first rental together?’

Anna (arm through Jim’s perhaps; ‘a couple’) ‘Yes.’

Hilary ‘Awwh. High ceilings. Lots of light.’

Anna ‘Lots of light, yes.’

Jim ‘Yeah, very high, yeah.’

Hilary ‘I’m sorry, your names again?’

Anna ‘Mr and Mrs Buchanan – I’m Michael, he’s Jane, I mean, ha, I’m Jane and he’s Michael – sorry I’m just giddy at the thought of it all.’

Hilary ‘You’re so sweet. Where have I heard those names before, Michael and Jane, where have I heard that?’

(Singing.) ‘A robin feathering his nest

Has very little time, to rest.

While gathering his

Bits of twine and twig’

Hilary/Anna (singing) ‘Though quite intent in his pursuit’

Hilary/Anna/Jim (singing) ‘He has a merry tune to toot

He knows a song

Will move the job along!’

Hilary ‘You’re so sweet.’

Anna ‘It all feels so new still, only married two weeks.’

Hilary ‘Two weeks?!’

Jim ‘Yeah.’

Hilary ‘Oh that is so sweet. Your first home. Something that says “look how well we’re doing”. A place of our own, tick. Married, tick. Jobs – you do have jobs, don’t you?’

Anna ‘Teachers. We’re both teachers.’

Hilary ‘We’ll need references.’

Anna ‘Of course!’

Hilary ‘And a security deposit of £34.’

Anna ‘I think we can manage that, right sweetheart?’

Jim ‘Yes, we can manage that.’

Hilary ‘Lots of potential in this room. A great social space, host dinner parties, invite round friends, work colleagues, imagine some lovely new modern furniture, knick-knacks, little trinkets, odds and ends, bits and bobs, brighten the place up, really sell it. A space that can just say to people “look how well we’re doing”.’

Jim ‘What’s the area like, this part of London?’

Hilary ‘Up and coming, so this is the right time to move, prices are going up and up, which is bad in one sense, although it prices – this is insensitive, I know – but it prices out a lot of undesirables, if you know what I mean, because there have been problems – not any more.’

Jim ‘Problems?’

Hilary ‘Some homelessness, destitution, it’s the east, you know, the east has always had problems – has always had problems, but it’s on the up and up, so.’

Anna ‘Homelessness and destitution. And yet big properties like this just sat here completely empty.’

Hilary ‘Yes.’

Anna ‘Completely empty when people could be in them.’

Hilary ‘Way of the world, I suppose.’

Anna ‘Yes, I suppose it is.’

Hilary ‘Good for you, though.’

Anna ‘Yes.’

Hilary ‘So?’

Anna/ Jim ‘We’ll take it!’

John What a cunt.

Hilary Strange being east.

John Important.

Hilary I know. Miss ’em though, some of them, Chris, Angela, Stuart –

Anna They can still come round –

John No, they cannot ‘come round’.

Anna No I know I just mean –

John No ‘just’ or anything, this is why we’re here. This is why we left the rest of them, behind, this isn’t a game anymore. This isn’t a hobby, it’s not a party, ten, twenty, thirty people crashing on the floor together at any one time. Yes solidarity is important, people around you, working together, living breathing playing fucking but if you’re together then you’re vulnerable and if you’re vulnerable you get caught – them lot, I love ’em, but they get caught, we’ve got to go the extra mile. You can’t bring down the structure of something you’re inside of; we’ve gotta step out of it. Out of the system, and underground, we’re doing this. Properly.

Jim Professional.

John What?

Jim ’Bout being professional.

John That’s right, Jim’s right, it’s about being professional. From amateur to professional. Which means breaking all ties – I’m sorry. We’ll run this place with the same philosophies, this will be a house of freedom and thinking but it’s just us. Just the four of us.

Jim Like the Musketeers.

John I’m not joking, Jim.

Jim I’m not joking, the Musketeers were incredible. The Musketeers had commitment and nobility. They had a code of honour.

John This is what we committed to. Say goodbye. Now – here in this room. In this room with no walls and a toilet in it. Say goodbye to your friends, to your family. And to the old you. We burn our past.

Go on, everything you have, we’re flushing it.

Jim Might block it.

John I don’t care, Jim.

Jim Victorian, this plumbing.

John Everything’s Victorian – the attitudes, the mindset, the prejudices fuck it. We’re flushing it. All of it. Bye, John.

Anna Bye, Anna!

Hilary Bye, Hil.

Jim Er yeah bye. Jim.

John Blow it up, or burn it down.

John/Hilary Blow it up, or burn it down.

John/Hilary/Anna Blow it up, or burn it down.

John/Hilary/Anna/Jim Blow it up, or burn it down.

Anna Was fun though.

Jim What?

Anna Being the Buchanans, for just a moment.

Jim I hated the Buchanans.

Anna I know.

Jim I hated the Buchanans, Anna, they were smug and they were completely blind.

Anna Not their personalities, which we invented anyway –

Jim They’re real, those types of people, those types of young people, painfully real.

Anna I meant pretending to be real, you know. . .

Jim What?

Anna Item.

Jim . . .

Anna With a future together –

Jim Their future together was shit. Their future together was monotomy and monogamy and just convincing themselves they were happy while they wait to die.

Anna I know, but still.

Jim I’m just fucking around.

Anna Wanker.

Jim I mean I’m not, it’s all true, but I mean I know what you mean, it was – there was something about that. In their world, if we still lived in their world, you’d be my . . . ‘that’.

Anna And you mine.

Jim I thought that when I first saw you, actually.

Anna No you didn’t – really?

Jim Yes.

Anna I did you, actually.

Jim But that’s – it’s not real, it’s fantasy.

Anna It’s romanticism, the corruption of real moments by projecting clichés onto them, ones we’ve all seen in films or read in books, star-crossed lovers, love at first sight, all the nonsense.

Jim Rain falling.

Anna The crowds part.

Jim Music.

Anna Exactly. When the moment itself, pure, should be enough, without projecting someone else’s branded version of romance onto it.

‘Hello.’

Jim I said it to you first.

Anna You did. Even though you’re shy.

Jim ‘Hello.’

Anna ‘Hello.’

‘What book’s that?’

Jim ‘Kropotkin.’

Anna ‘It is often said that anarchists live in a world of dreams to come, and do not see the things which happen today. We do see them. And only too well. And in their true colours. And that is what makes us carry the hatchet into the forest of prejudice that besets us.’

Jim ‘That’s very good.

Who have you got, there?’

Anna ‘Goldman.’

Jim ‘I can’t quote him cause I don’t know him.’

Anna ‘It’s a she.’

Jim ‘Well, now I feel like a cunt.’

Anna ‘Don’t, I don’t want you to.’

Jim ‘I’m still learning.’

Anna ‘We’re all still learning.’

Jim ‘First time in this place, I like it.’

Anna ‘Yeah it’s a good selection. Til the pigs come and raid it.’

Jim ‘Do the pigs raid it?’

Anna ‘Course they do. A censorship of ideas.’

Jim ‘Would you like to have a drink with me?’

Anna ‘I don’t drink. Alcohol pacifies. It stops you being proportionately angry at the big stuff and makes you disproportionately angry at the little stuff.’

Jim ‘Would you like to smoke a joint with me?’

Anna ‘Yes please.’

Jim And then I could have taken you –

Anna Spun me around in your arms –

Jim (clipped, 1940s accent) ‘Oh my darling Anna.’

Anna (same) ‘James.’

Jim ‘I’ll never let you out of my sight again, dammit. These eyes will never leave you, these arms will never let you go.’

Anna ‘And those lips.’

Jim ‘Do you hear that?’

Anna ‘Yes. Music.’

Jim ‘What is it?’

Anna ‘Rachmaninov, I think.’

Jim ‘Is it real or are we only dreaming it?’

Anna ‘You’d better kiss me before we wake up. Kiss me like there’s no tomorrow. Kiss me like they do – in the movies.’

Hilary I was listening to that.

John, I said I was listening to that.

Don’t, you’ll scratch it.

John I want to scratch it.

Hilary It’s peaceful.

John It’s positively comatose, that’s the problem.

Hilary You’re hurting my ears, it sounds like it’s screaming –

John It is screaming. This is what it actually sounds like, under the rigidly, repressed order of intro, verse, chorus, verse, chorus, bridge, chorus, outro. It’s screaming. It’s the ‘illusion’ of art, for the masses, convincing them they’re experiencing some free expression – intro, verse, chorus, verse, chorus, bridge, chorus, outro – like an inmate painting in prison.

You know Bach actually used maths to write his pieces 1+1+1, equals, and don’t question.

Hilary What about jazz? Wasn’t jazz meant to be new notes, in its own order?

John That’s what jazz was meant to be, yes. But then they packaged it and sold it. Jazz is a fucking traitor. Not as bad as pop. Everyone, leaving the factories on a Friday night, ‘Here’s some music – don’t look out of your window, don’t question anything, here’s a song, just dance. Left foot, right foot, together. Turn and back. Turn and back. Just – dance.’

Anna/ Hilary (sing from The Supreme’s ‘Where Did Our Love Go’)

John That’s not dancing. That’s marching to their tune. That’s goosestepping in time.

Hilary I’ll show you dancing.

Anna I’ll show you dancing.

Hilary AaaaaaaaAAAAAHHHHHHH!

Anna AaawwwhhoooooOOOOOOW!

John (as Edward Heath, baton, conducting) And a one, two, three, and, bring in the strings, and now the bass. Lose the strings, and now the wind. And now the shopkeepers and the miners. Now the steelworkers and office clerks, one two three, one two three, keep time, two three, play your part, two three.

Jim ‘As Mr Heath, the builder’s son from Bexley, amateur conductor, arrives on the steps of 10 Downing Street, ousting Mr Wilson’s Labour government, to begin his first term as Prime Minister . . .’

John ‘We used to fight our enemies, on foreign soils. But the future of this country is not one of international conflict. The real danger in the future of this country is dissent from within. The decade ahead of us presents real challenges, towards a ‘civil war’, that we must work together to prevent . . .’

I was surrounded by them. I’ve been surrounded by them my whole life.

Jim Who?

John Tories.

Jim Yeah?

John Yeah, even before they knew they were Tories, I knew they were Tories.

Jim Prince Charles was at Cambridge when we were.

John Yeah.

Jim ’Parently.

John Here’s my theory about Tories, do you want to hear it?

Jim Er, yo – . . . yeah.

John Eh?

Jim I said yeah. Yes.

John I went to Haberdashers’ Aske’s, private school for boys, that was where I was sent by my parents, out of sight, out of mind.

Jim/John/Hilary/Anna CHILDREN SHOULD BE SEEN AND NOT HEARD.

Hilary SIT UP STRAIGHT.

Anna DON’T ANSWER BACK.

Jim/John/Hilary/Anna BECAUSE I SAID SO.

John The sound of hard shoes on the cloisters, the sight of all that ancient, immovable stone, it cannot fail but to imprint upon them the weight of the past. It represses any notion of ‘another way’. Because the old ways feel so immovable and sturdy and strong.

My theory is that it is possible, entirely possible, for a future Conservative Member of Parliament born today to live his or her life from cradle to dispatch box having only ever heard the sound of hard shoes on stone floors, that awful echoey, cloppity-clop of the past, the sound of reverence, of seriousness of propriety and respect, from church to private school to Oxbridge, to Parliament, just cloisters. All they know are cloisters. And that’s why they are the way they are.

Haberdashers’ Aske’s. Its motto. ‘Serve and Obey.’

Jim My school didn’t have a motto.

John There’s only two types of group in society, Jim. Those whose school had a motto, and those whose didn’t. ‘Serve and obey.’ Walking on the left, chapel at 7 a.m., breakfast at 8, dinner at 7, sing the national anthem, pray to God.

Jim Labour aren’t much better.

John Democracy in this country is a fucking illusion – here’s a piece of paper, every five years. Red, or blue, or yellow, not a blind bit of difference between them. Cosmetics. Nothing more.

Jim ‘Voted Labour all me life, me.’ It’s its own kind of fascism, I’ve seen it.

John I know.

Jim ‘Who d’you think you are lad?’

. . .

‘I said, yer listening? Oh ay gone deaf all of a sudden have yer, can’t hear yer old man, now, ey, I shouldn’t wonder.’

‘Don’t listen to him, I’m proud of you, love.’

‘Poncing off, to fucking, Cam-ber-idge.’

‘Not poncing off anywhere. Worked hard. What’s wrong with him wanting to leave, nothing wrong, you leave him be.’

‘Think’s he’s better.’

‘I said LEAVE HIM BE, or so much as help me, I’ll knock you six ways from Sunday. Don’t think I’m scared o’ yer, you sack of worthless shite.’

‘YOU! KEEP THAT SHUT, RIGHT? SICK O’ YER. SICK O’ THE BLEEDING LOT OF YOU, GOD SPARE ME, WHY HE GAVE ME HER FOR A WIFE, AND HIM FOR A SON. CAMBRIDGE!’

Anna Jim?

Jim . . .

Anna Jim –

Jim What?

Hilary But they are the lesser of two evils, Labour – if you had to choose.

John We don’t have to choose, why compromise? Hilary Abortion legalised, homosexuality legalised – John In Place of Strife. Tax and spends.

Hilary But socialism, though. Bakunin, states, ‘Freedom without socialism is privilege and injustice. But socialism without freedom is slavery and brutality.’

John Let me tell you something. The history of the modern United Kingdom isn’t one of Labour, then Tories, then Liberals, then Tories, then Labour – it’s just of the Tories. They’re the constant. They will always get back in. They don’t even have to fight for it. They just have to sit back and let the passage of time roll by until it is handed to them again, wherefrom their sole principle and reason for getting up every morning will be to wherever and however possible Keep Things The Same.

Haberdashers’ Aske’s. Serve and obey. What did we do, Jim, our last exam, Cambridge?

Jim Medicine, I started with.

John Jim?

Jim But I realised. Medicine is just sticking plasters over wounds. It’s stitching up and cleaning up and sending on your way, nothing more.

So I switched to economics instead. Which is proper medicine.

Anna See, Jim.

Jim What?

Anna That, then. That was good.

Jim?

Jim I heard yer.

John What did we do, Jim? Last exam – this close, this close to getting a DEGREE. ‘You have copied down what we told you! You have repeated it back to us well! Now you are ready to go out into the world.’

Jim We stood up.

John Both of us.

Jim Middle of the hall.

John Most prestigious learning institute in the world.

Jim Three years’ work.

John More – our entire, youthful lives.

Jim We held up our exam papers.

John All our written answers. This close.

Jim And we burnt them.

John . . . we burnt them.

Jim Because fuck them.

Anna ‘Can I have a drink now please, Mummy?’

Hilary ‘Here, I’ll wash it up for you.’

Anna ‘Fairy?’

Hilary ‘That means it’s special for me. It’s especially mild to keep my hands soft.’

All (singing) ‘Now hands that do dishes can feel soft as your face. With mild green – Fairy Liquid.’

John ‘This is the complexion Ann gets, with Knights Castille. And as long as she does, he won’t be looking at anyone else.’

Jim ‘A 9mm Parabellum Carbine Beretta M1938/42. Slim and lightweight, it’s the gun your friends want you to have and your enemies don’t want to see. Beretta – for all your killing needs.’

BANG!

Anna Don’t!

Jim Just joking.

Anna Don’t point it in my face.

Jim Not loaded.

Hilary Where’d it come from?

John Down the line.

Hilary How far down the line?

John Only Brussels.

Hilary Who, Wolfgang?

Jim (Wolfgang) ‘Yes?’

John ‘That was a great speech.’

Jim ‘OK.’

John ‘What you and, and Octavio and Miguel are doing, over in Paris and in –’

Jim ‘Thanks.’

John ‘And so dangerous for you to come to speak in London, they could detain you here if they –’

Jim ‘They could detain me everywhere. But we must spread the word. Excuse –’

John ‘Exactly, that’s – exactly, we’re . . . we’re hoping, thinking, of setting something up. Erm. Here. In the UK, London. In Britain.’

Jim ‘Something?’

John ‘A group.’

Jim ‘A group. OK. Good luck.’

John ‘No wait, I’m serious, we’re serious –’

Jim ‘Everyone always thinks they’re serious. No disrespect.’

John ‘We’re ready. We’ve studied. We’ve trained, our minds, our . . . We’re ready, you have to believe us. But – we’d, we would need help. We would need . . . stuff, that we can’t acquire over here. We would need to be part of the chain. The network.’

Jim ‘You can’t just decide to become a link in the chain, you have to earn it –’

John ‘Let us earn it, let us prove to you.’

Jim ‘. . . mmm . . . So you say serious, how serious, are you?’

Hilary ‘. . . Deadly . . .’

Jim ‘So, say, I don’t know, someone contact you, someone need something storing, away from prying eyes, cleaning, preparing, loading, all that, ready for a situation as and when a situation may arise . . .’

John ‘We could do that. We could definitely do that.’

Jim ‘You have a place that is safe?’

John ‘We will have.’

Jim ‘Who is “we”?’

John ‘Four of us, A – . . . someone called Anna, someone called Jim, this is someone called Hilary and I’m someone called John.’

Jim ‘. . . OK, well, hello someone called John. Maybe we will be in touch.’

Insert magazine clip in this thing here.

Anna Where’d you learn this?

Jim Read it.

Anna Read it where?

Jim From a book. Pull back on this, that locks it in.

Anna Sexy.

Hilary You are quite sexy, doing that.

Jim Thank you – safety catch. Lift up. And point. Best resting against your shoulder. Aim down the barrel. Front trigger is single shots, click, click, click. Back trigger is rapid fire.

Anna This is what they used on the embassy?

Jim Yup.

Anna When will they want it back?

Jim Dunno, whenever.

John It’s ours for now, if we want it.

Hilary Guns are one thing though, right. But guns mean you have to be there, at the target, guns require firing. Bombs don’t require firing, bombs can be left.

Anna Bombs are also indiscriminate, though. Guns can be aimed. Bombs do whatever the fuck they like.

Hilary I think that’s why I like them. They have integrity. They don’t care.

John Anna?

Anna Yes?

John Would you like to express something?

Anna What?

John Would you like to express something about bombs that you’re uncomfortable with?

Anna I would like to talk about it, I have nothing particular to express.

John OK. Talk.

Anna Innocent people might get –

John Who are these innocent people you speak of, do you mean politicians, do you mean the police, do you mean, do you mean the, the soldiers, or the civil servants at the doll office, or the teachers in the school that lie – were the guards at the concentration camp innocent because they were just following orders unquestioningly – I’m not comparing, but I am, I sort of am, I’m –

Hilary I think I can take this, let me –

Anna You don’t have to sell to me our war like it’s a two-for-one on talcum powder, you can save your pitch, I don’t need convincing, I just want to think through my thoughts –

Hilary There are these flats in Swansea.

John I fucking love this story.

Anna I don’t want a story, don’t tell me stories, narratives corrupt, narratives make people think there is meaning and a purpose to a series of randomly connected events, that there is a plan to life, and there isn’t –

John Listen –

Hilary There is this tower block, ‘streets in the sky’, that BOLLOCKING FUCKING urban planning myth, ‘we’ll take you from your horizontal open plains, from your square inches of land, and pile you vertically upwards, together, one on top of the other, because it’s better for you’. I would look up at them as I waited for my bus home from school. The flicker of light from one window. And then two floors up, and three windows to the right. The same light. Flickering, changing, dancing, to the same rhythm, the same beat. And it struck me. They Are Watching The Same Thing. They all return home from the production line, enter this block, walk to their individual cells, close the doors, and they sit there . . . watching . . . ‘recuperating’ . . . drawn to the light. Like mosquitoes . . . Their eyelids dipping as their bodies slowly succumb to the tiredness of the day . . .

Imagine, I thought, imagine if there was a power cut, and the lights went out. Maybe they would turn to the person next to them in the room. And maybe they would talk. And maybe they would open the door into the corridor and peek out to see other people doing the same. And suddenly the whole block is talking to each other, and then I realised that’s it. That’s what cannot be allowed to happen. That’s why the power must stay on. That’s why the flickering boxes cannot break.

And that’s the point of the explosion. That’s the point of the gunshot. It’s a bang. A bang to wake everyone from their slumber. A bang to make everyone Look Up.

Anna . . . OK.

John Where’s the stuff?

Jim Under the sink.

John No one asked questions?

Jim Why would they ask questions, just household stuff, a ‘Saturday shop’, could be baking a cake, all they know.

Anna/Hilary (singing) If I knew you were coming I’d have baked a cake.

Baked a cake. Baked a cake.

Anna/Hilary/John/Jim (singing) If I knew you were coming I’d have baked a cake. Howd-ya do, Howd-ya do, Howd-ya do.

Anna COMMUNIQUÉ!

Jim NUMBER ONE!

Hilary TWO!

John THREE!

Ann FOUR!

Jim FASCISM.

Hilary OPPRESSION

All WILL – BE – SMASHED

Anna EMBASSIES

John HIGH PIGS

Jim SPECTACLES

All SPECTACLES, TESTICLES, WALLET AND WATCH!

Anna JUDGES

All PROPERTY

Anna ‘Fellow revolutionaries. We have sat quietly and suffered the violence of the system for too long. We are being attacked daily. Violence does not only exist in the army, the police and the prisons. It exists in the shoddy alienating culture pushed out by TV films and magazines, it exists in the ugly sterility of urban life.

In a crisis of capitalism the ruling class can only react by attacking the people politically.

But the system will never collapse or capitulate by itself.’

John ‘Order. ORDER!

The Secretary of State for Employment, Mr Robert Carr!’

Jim (as Carr) ‘Are we really saying, that the Government, and by Government we of course always mean the People! – elected, unlike protest leaders accountable, unlike anarchists – are the Opposition really saying that it is not within our parliamentary right to even discuss reform of industrial policy in this country, let alone act on it? Without fear of intimidation from the unions, without fear of intimidation from workers, students and, worse, troublemakers and bullies? Well, this Government will not only discuss these issues, we will act upon them . . . An end to the so-called WORKERS OF THIS COUNTRY HOLDING THIS COUNTRY TO RANSOM!’

Hilary The Right Honourable Secretary of State for Employment Robert Carr . . . is going to discover what is right, and what is honourable, tonight.

John Haberdashers’ Aske’s, school for boys. Chapel. 7 a.m.

(Singing.) ‘And did those feet . . . in ancient times . . .’

John/Hilary/Jim/Anna ‘Walk upon England’s mountains green

And was the holy Lamb of God,’

Jim (as Carr) ‘Get down!’

Anna (as wife) ‘Robert, I’m scared!’

John/Hilary/Jim/Anna ‘On England’s pleasant pastures seen!

And did the Countenance Divine,

Shine forth upon our clouded hills?

And was Jerusalem builded here

Among these dark Satanic Mills?’

John Everyone needs an anthem to march off to war to.

Jim Everyone needs a war to march off to.

Hilary Someone’s been reading Randolph Bourne.

Jim I’m sure someone has, it isn’t me.

Hilary Randolph Bourne states that –

Jim Rando Whoever isn’t here is he – these are my thoughts, and I’m saying there always has to be an enemy, doesn’t there? Governments need there to be a threat, they have to unite people against something, and if there’s nothing there, then you Make One Up. Make one closer to home. Tell ’em the immigrants want your job. Tell ’em the blacks want your women. Tell ’em the poor are getting fickle, and that Something Must Be Done. Give ’em fear, give ’em paranoia, give ’em –

John The FA Cup.

Jim Gi – . . . what?

John A side to support against another side, doesn’t matter who really, they try and kick this, that way, into that, they try and kick the other way, into that – stadiums, they’re the new temples, footy the new religion, promotion the new heaven, relegation the new hell – so long as it occupies hearts and minds. Pick a side, any side –

Hilary Come on you reds!

John Go on you blues!

Jim/John/Hilary/Anna (singing Match of the Day tune) Da-da-da-daah da-dah da-dah-dah, da-da-da-daah da-dah da-dah-dah, da-da-da-daah da-dah da-dah-dah, da-da-da-daah da-dah da-dah-dah, da-dah da-dah da da.

Hilary What do you see when you look like that?

John He used to take me to the games.

Hilary Who did?

John He was sports editor, for the Evening Standard. I tried to get into it, he knew I wasn’t, though. A disappointment.

Hoisted up there, on his shoulders . . .

Didn’t really – you know. Get a chance to – you know. Properly know, him, until . . .

Nor him himself, probably.

‘Retirement’, at the age of sixty-five, like that’s some fucking compensation. That in your final years, you’re finally given the chance to live. Why? Why do we all do it, why do we all fucking . . . accept that?

Hilary What do you see?

John He’s in the Red Lion, under the dartboard. In the corner. Getting slowly inebriated like all the rest of ’em. Pretty soon there’ll be a fight, glass smashed. Turn on each other, fighting inwards, instead of looking outwards. That’s the best way. Like rats in a sack. Let ’em fight each other.

He has nothing to say to his wife.

He has no friends left.

He’s sitting in the corner of the pub. Nursing a pint.

Hilary What’s that sound?

John It’s a brass band. The workers, they have music that they play. It’s sort of theirs, sort of.

Hilary It’s beautiful.

John In some ways.

Hilary Did he ever play an instrument? This guy?

John No.

Hilary What’s he doing?

John Can’t you see?

Hilary He’s holding his heart.

John Yeah.

Hilary Is he dying?

John He is, yeah . . .

Hilary Can we save him?

John For what? Save him so that he can do what?

They taught him everything, except how to live . . .

Anna . . . John.

John Yeah?

Anna The girl.

John Yeah I know. But they went off. They went off, Jim, you did it –

Jim I told you.

John They both went off! YES.

Hilary It’s started. The war has started.

Anna The little girl was at home.

Hilary There are always going to be little girls, Anna, steel yourself, focus.

Anna A LITTLE GIRL.

Hilary WE KNOW!

We’re trying to wake her up. Not kill her.

John ‘And how old are you, little girl?’

Anna What?

John ‘Come. Sit down.’

Anna . . .

John ‘What’s your name?’

Anna Anna.

John ‘Hello, Anna.’

Anna Are you a doctor?

John ‘I am a doctor, yes.’

Anna Where’s your white coat?

John ‘I’m a different kind of doctor. I fix things in your head, not in your body.

Your teachers tell me you’ve been getting into a bit of trouble recently.

Why do you think that is?

You hit someone.’

Anna They started it.

John ‘Tell me. Do you feel a sort of . . . fizzing. In your stomach. Like something bubbling. Do you feel your face something going bright red, like you’re going to explode?’

Jim/Hilary/John/Anna BANG!

Anna I woke up, you weren’t –

Jim What?

Anna You weren’t there.

Jim Weren’t where? Where was I meant to be?

Anna Nowhere. I just. Like it when you’re – when we wake up and you’re there.

Jim I just fell asleep wherever. I just –

Anna In Hilary’s room.

Jim We don’t have rooms.

Anna The room where Hilary was –

Jim And John was there. Before he wasn’t. You could have joined –

Anna Can’t sleep, loads of people, legs and arms, and always in the middle where you can’t roll over –

Jim/ John/ Hilary (singing) ‘There were four in a bed and the little one said, roll over, roll over, and so they all rolled over and one fell out and now there were only three in a bed’ –

Anna – maybe we could tonight, like just hug, I’d like a hug I think.

Jim OK. If we – if that’s where we fall asleep, then . . . sure.

John That’s them. The squad.

Anna They’re young.

Hilary Ten grand?

John This bunch here, old Dick Barton and Dixon of Dock Green, they’re the senior officers –

Jim ‘Come along then, let’s be havin’ you’ – fuck off.

John But these lot, these are different, B-team or something.

Hilary What would you do with ten grand?

John What can you do with ten grand, nothing, you think ten grand is worth more than freedom, justice, equality?

Anna People will be looking for us.

John We’re safe.

Hilary I think we’re smarter. Than these lot –

John We are smarter.

Hilary They’re not going to catch us.

John They’re not going to catch us.

Anna I think this one’s quite cute.

Jim Well, why don’t you go and fuck him then, Anna.

Anna . . .

John They’re pulling in some of the guys.

Jim How do you know?

John There’s been word.

Jim How can there have been word, we’re –

John Through the channel, Jim, it’s safe.

Hilary We’re safe, here.

John Anna.

Anna Yeah?

John What’s that?

Anna has produced a little tea-pot.

Anna It’s a tea-pot.

John . . . wh – . . . why?

Anna I found it. At the market. I thought it would be nice. To make tea.

John We have . . . we just . . . there’s mugs, just drop a bag in a mug.

Anna Jesus, were you born in a barn?

John No, but Jesus was, number one, and number two . . . what the fuck, don’t go spending money on fucking nothing, we haven’t got enough money.

Anna I’m sorry, I just thought it would be – Jim/John/Hilary/Anna THE ROYAL ALBERT HALL.

John ‘Miss United States of America! Look – at – that. Wowee. Give us a little turn there, miss, that’s it. Judges are smiling . . .

And here’s Miss Egypt! Exotic, or what?

And on home turf, it’s Miss – United – Kingdom.’

Jim/John/Hilary/Anna BANG.

Hilary/Anna BIBA, KENSIGTON HIGH STREET.

Hilary ‘Recuperation’, that’s all it is, that’s capitalism’s power, it holds things out of your reach so one day you think you might riot but first you need to eat so you have to work, and then suddenly through a tiny wage increase or deflation in the price of this or that, you ‘obtain’ one of those things – a coat, a bag, a slightly better car – and suddenly you think, ‘Oh, well, actually maybe it isn’t so bad’, and anyway . . . their blouses make me look fat –

Jim/John/Hilary/Anna BANG.

John/Jim THE POST OFFICE TOWER.

Jim It’s like a knob.

John It is.

Jim Like a big knob in the centre of London.

John Look at the size of our cock, we say, look how big and tall it is!

‘And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.’

Hilary The higher they build their towers, the worse it shall be when they fall.

Jim/John/Hilary/Anna BANG!

Anna Jim?

Jim Yeah?

Anna . . . nothing.

Voice (male, off) Smith.

Anna You’re looking for me.

Voice I’m sorry, who is this?

Anna You’re looking for me. Hello.

Voice How did you get this number?

Anna Have you not been watching us? We can find anyone. We’re getting closer . . .

Smith Now listen here –

Anna Recently promoted Detective Sergeant Robert Daniel Smith.

Did you have a nice birthday?

Did your colleagues bring in a cake?

Smith I did not inform – . . . now, look. No one else needs to get hurt –

Anna We haven’t hurt anybody. Yet.

Smith You’re throwing your lives away, turn yourself in.

Anna What do you dream about? At night?

When the lights go out and the flicker and the buzz of all the spectacles are shut out, and you can return, almost, slightly, to a state of natural being . . . to a state of you . . . What do you learn about yourself in that deep, dark fall into the subconscious? What do you learn about yourself that you really, actually want . . .?

Smith Tell me what you want.

Anna I can hear it in your voice. A longing, contained. A longing for something else. A longing for something naughty . . .

Smith A . . . I . . .

Anna It’s alright, Robert Daniel. It’s human . . .

Smith Where are you?

Anna Look for me.

Smith I am looking –

Anna No, you’re searching, but you’re not seeing.

Smith This isn’t a game.

Anna No. It isn’t.

Hilary It’s wrong, that’s what it is, it’s, it’s, it’s cowardly! No. No, no, no.

John We don’t have any choice.

Hilary No. Shop owners aren’t our enemy, post offices aren’t our enemy, pubs aren’t our enemy –

John Oi, yes they are. Yes they are, Hil, they are, they’re complicit, they acquiesce, they’re architects of their own ignorance.

Hilary So you’re gonna rob them, balaclavas, knives, classy, really classy –

Jim Just stake ’em out, that’s all, see what the game is.

Hilary THUGS! Criminals, everything they say we are –

John We’re fucking hungry, that’s what we are. We have no funds.

Hilary Let’s keep doing the cheques. They’re just lying around, student halls, easy pickings, please –

John The cheques have left us vulnerable, they pulled in Albert cause of the cheques, Jake, Stuart, Ian – they can be traced, it’s stupid –

Jim We won’t hurt anyone.

Hilary You’re hurting me, I hate this.

Jim Anna?

Anna . . .

Jim What does that mean?

Anna It means you’re doing it anyway, so just don’t get caught and don’t get followed.

She has arranged some furniture. Put her kettle out, with a tea-set – children’s cups, almost like it’s a game. In a Wendy house . . .

Hilary is there.

Hilary Did you like, fucking –

Anna What?

Hilary Like, clean, or –

Anna No, just – not much, it was just a mess.

Hilary You’ve fixed your hair.

Anna It was in my face.

Hilar Ha.

Anna Are you laughing at me?

Hilary John and I, we’re going to Paris, we have to pick up more supplies.

Anna OK.

Hilary ‘And we expect our dinner on the table when we’re back!’

Anna Funny.

Hilary You’ll be OK, on your own?

Anna I won’t be on my own.

Hilary . . . ha. Right.

Anna What?

Hilary Jim.

Anna Yeah.

Hilary Is that what . . .?

Anna What?

Hilary . . . just be careful.

Smith (male, off) Smith.

Anna Having fun?

Smith . . . hello.

Anna I hope your wife isn’t a fan of Biba. Sorry if so.

Smith I’m glad that you called again.

Anna We’re getting closer.

Smith So are we, Hilary.

Pause.

Or is it Anna?

Anna Mendleson.

It’s Anna, isn’t it?

Anna No.

Smith I think it is.

Anna . . . we don’t have names.

Smith You did. Anna Mendelson from Stockport. Studied English at Essex University. Parents Maurice and Tina. Was Head Girl at school. Won a prize for drawing. Played in the school band.

You did have a name, Anna. You had a family. You had a life. You had a future –

Anna All meaningless. A spectacle –

Smith I can save you. You can live –

Anna What makes you think I want saving?

Smith – don’t let the others bring you down with them. Jim, John and Hilary.

Anna Ha. Bring me down.

Smith You’re different from them. I know it. You want out. You want a normal life, free. Family. Children. Love. I can tell –

Anna You can’t tell that.

Smith I can.

Anna How?

Smith Because you’re the one that keeps calling me.

Anna puts the phone down.

John appears as the child psychologist, sat on tiny chairs. He gestures for Anna to join him . . .

John ‘Hello again, Anna.’

Anna What?

John ‘So your teachers say you’re still lashing out in class.’

Anna Do they?

John (pause) ‘Anna, tell me. What does . . . what does it feel like. When you’re angry?

What does that “anger” feel like, for you?’

Anna I don’t know.

John ‘Say some words, any words. They don’t have to be good words, or the right words, just words. Hot? Does it feel hot?’

Anna I suppose –

John ‘Does it feel . . . fast, or slow?’

Anna Fast?

John ‘Do you like it, or do you dislike it?’

Anna Dislike.

John ‘Why?’

Anna Because . . . it, like hurts.

John ‘Anger “hurts”, does it?’

Anna I don’t know.

John ‘Would you prefer to be. . . calmer? Happier?

What makes you angry? If you fixed those things, you could fix your anger –’

Anna Lots of things.

John ‘Lots of things. When . . . when people say something that hurts you?’

Anna Yes.

John ‘When something unfair happens?’

Anna Yes.

John ‘When you feel “powerless”, or like you’re backed into a corner? When you feel hopeless, like you can’t change anything. When you feel stuck.’

Anna Yes . . . yes . . .

John (Beat. Puts his notepad away. Beat.) ‘I have this quote, that I like. Do you know what a quote is?’

Anna Yes.

John ‘It’s a Buddhist quote, now Buddhists, Anna, are very peaceful people. They’re calm, and, reflective.

The quote is this: “Holding on to anger . . . is like grasping a hot coal with the intent of throwing it, at someone else” – yes? – “but it’s you, who are the one who gets burned”.’

Do you see?

Anna, anger, and hate, and rage, at other people . . . will only ever destroy you, not them. You have to face what is making you so angry, in the world . . . and you have to let it go. Forgive it. Forgive them . . . and let it go . . .’

Anna But –

John ‘But?’

Anna But –

John ‘Yes?’

Anna What if it isn’t fair? What if it isn’t fair . . .

John ‘Anna –’

Jim (off) Anna?

Jim is calling off, from the entrance.

Anna leaps up and makes the final preparation for laying the dinner table.

Sticks some music on the record player, lights some candles.

There are plates, and wine glasses now, and the suggestion of walls, and furniture, something solid, which has been growing . . .

Jim enters.

Jim Anna, I’m home.

Anna Surprise.

Jim What’s this?

Anna Nothing, just threw something together.

Jim I’m not hungry, I ate a couple of hours ago.

Anna A couple of hours ago, what kind of eating time is that – you’ve invented a new meal time, Jim.

Jim Eh?

Looks different. In here.

Anna I thought we could have an evening in.

Jim ‘An evening in’, what does that even mean?

Anna I just want to talk. Please.

Jim (beat; sits) What’s this?

Anna A napkin.

Jim A . . . a fucking . . . is this . . . what the –

Anna It’s only a fucking napkin, Jim, in case you spill something, I got ’em cheap –

Jim takes some food and smears it down his clothes.

They stare at each other.

Anna You once had doubts. You said.

Jim No. You said that about me –

Anna About the no-going-backness.

Jim What’s wrong?

Anna I’m not sure.

Jim You’re tired.

Anna I’m not tired, I love you, it – it obviously just looks the same as tiredness but I’m not tired.

Do you love me?

Jim How can you ask me that? If you have to ask –

Anna Because . . . because sometimes, when things are hard, it helps to know that someone else cares – I don’t think that’s all that strange, do you?

Jim You need that affirmation, do you, the fake affirmation of someone else telling you that you’re worth something –

Anna SOMETIMES. YES.

Jim . . .

Anna So the thing is. What if maybe you we didn’t just be all random and flexible and open about this – whatever this is –

Jim Please, don’t define it –

Anna I’m not, just . . . well actually, yes, I think that would help I think that would help it feel real –

Jim Well, I’m sorry that you need this, this crutch, because its been drilled into you that none of us are enough just us on our own, we need to be in a partnership to be strong, cause that’s bollocks and I’m here to tell you that you are enough without me, Anna.

Anna I absolutely agree with all of that, and I want you to know that I’m listening and that I hear you, but so here’s the thing, here’s what I want to say, if you’ll let me.

I know, OK, that I’m enough, on my own, without you. And I don’t want to possess you to give my life meaning or myself self-esteem. But I just think. I just think actually that there is a sort of . . . loveliness. And brilliantness. Sometimes. To knowing that there is someone else in the world who thinks of you and only you in a certain way, and you think of them and only them in a certain way, and that it’s something beautiful that you share and part of the beauty is that it’s only you two that share it. And that when things are tough for you or tough for them, or happy for you or happy for them, that by having that someone, the happiness is sort of multiplied, by being shared, and that the toughness is halved, by being shared. And I don’t mean in like a Valentine’s Day card way, or Hollywood movie way or a Church of England way, I just mean that, outside of the horror that is normal relationships, with the house and the car and the routine and the ‘you wash, I’ll dry’ violence of the whole thing . . . that in there, somewhere, messy and dirty and hidden as it is, is something possibly real, and wonderful. And I guess I’m saying if I was going to have that real thing, messy and complicated and violent as it is – totally agree – that I would be really chuffed if it was with you.

Jim . . . You’re tired. Get some sleep.

He stands, and exits.

Anna is left on her own for a bit. She takes a letter out of her pocket, staring at it. She licks it, sealing it and places a postage stamp on it, standing –

Suddenly . . . the walls begin to shake.

The sound of helicopters? She looks up.

Blue flashing lights. Sirens in the distance.

The others could run in.

John SHIT!

Hilary Can we run? Should we run? John, should we run?

John Jim, you have the rifle, you’re the best shot! Fuck them! FUCK THEM! COME AND GET US!

The walls shake – an explosion – boots on the ground, men and guns and torchlight and shouting . . .

A torchlight hits Anna. She covers her eyes. As it’s lowered, she sees Smith facing her.

They stare at each other.

Blackout.

ANNA MENDELSON, JIM GREENFIELD, JOHN BARKER AND HILARY CREEK WERE CHARGED AND FOUND GUILTY OF CONSPIRACY TO CAUSE EXPLOSIONS AND OF POSSESSION.

THEY WERE EACH SENTENCED TO TEN YEARS IN PRISON.

ANNA, JOHN AND HILARY REPRESENTED THEMSELVES IN COURT . . .

. . . ONLY JIM DID NOT.

ANNA’S DEFENCE WAS THAT THEY HAD BEEN ‘WORKING TOGETHER, FOR A HAPPIER AND MORE PEACEFUL WORLD’ . . .

IT BECAME THE LONGEST CRIMINAL TRIAL IN ENGLISH LEGAL HISTORY.





The Vote





The Vote was created by James Graham and Josie Rourke and was first performed at the Donmar Warehouse, London, on 24 April 2015 with the following cast and creatives:

Fisayo Akinade

Madalena Alberto

Jade Anouka

Eddie Arnold

Rita Balogun

MyAnna Buring

Nicholas Burns

Paul Chahidi

Jackie Clune

Pandora Colin

Rosalie Craig

Heather Craney

Stavros Demetraki

Judi Dench

Rachel Denning

Hadley Fraser

Tommy French

Mark Gatiss

Llewella Gideon

Joanna Griffin

Alice Hewkin

Gerard Horan

Chukwudi Iwuji

Stephen Kennedy

Kadiff Kirwan

Aïcha Kossoko

Beverley Longhurst

Andrew McDonald

Wanda Opalinska

Bhasker Patel

Bill Paterson

Prasanna Puwanarajah

Penny Ryder

Michael Shaeffer

Nina Sosanya

Catherine Tate

Yusra Warsama

Timothy West

Finty Williams

Director Josie Rourke

Designer Robert Jones

Lighting Designer Oliver Fenwick

Sound Designer Nick Lidster

Composer Michael Bruce

Movement Stephen Mear





The day of the General Election, 7 May 2015. 8.30pm – 10pm. A polling station at a Primary School, the Borough of Lambeth.

Polling Station staff & observers

Kirsty Henderson, Poll Clerk

Laura Williams, Poll Clerk

Stephen Crosswell, Presiding Officer

Alan Walker, Polling Agent

Voters

Grace Botchway, 50s, female, Jamaican-origin, takes a tumble

Pravin Shah, 40-50s, male, Indian shopkeeper

Fred Norris, 80s, male, has Alzheimer’s

Jonathan Clarke, 17, male, underage voter

Jerome Hanikie, 20s, male, take-away delivery driver

Alastair Swift, 40s, male, takes his ballot paper away

Alia Aminu, 40s, female, local Labour party worker

Alexandra Peters, 40s, female, Russian, first-time voter

Rochena Peters, 40s, female, married to Alexandra

Tom Baird, 30s, male, musician

Tilde Larson, 30s, female, Swedish journalist

Jasmine Lennon, 18, female, first-time voter

Carla Wu, 18, female, first-time voter

Paul Alleyne, 30s, warehouse worker

Gerry Henderson, 40s, Kirsty’s husband

Lucas Henderson, 18, Kirsty’s son

Kenneth Robson, 40s, financier, husband of Louisa

Louisa Robson, 40s, wife of Kenneth

Colin Henderson, 40s, Kirsty’s brother-in-law

Chika Devan, 20s, female, police officer

Howard Roberts, 40s, male, independent candidate

Stuart Coghlan, 50s, male, kid goes to this school

Christine Metcalf, 70s, mother of Lola

Lola Parkes, 40s, daughter of Christine

Maria Ferreira, 20s, female, Portuguese

Adeyami Abudu, 40s, male, Tory candidate

Simon Featherstone, 50s/ 60s, male, caretaker

Claire Dunn, 30s, female, has restricted growth

Maggie Tann, 50s, Kirsty’s neighbour

Terri Fletcher, 40s, female, white, intimidates Hanni

Hanni Yonis, 20s, female, Somali origin





Part One

Thursday 7th May, 2015. 8.30pm.

A primary school hall, set up today as a local polling station.

Grace Botchway a voter, is lying on the floor, holding her ankle. Her groceries are scattered.

Grace I’m alright.

Stephen Everybody back, it’s OK!

Kirsty, a poll clerk, moves to pick up Grace’s dropped ballot paper.

Grace Don’t you touch my vote, don’t look!

Laura, the other clerk, has already leapt forward to help. Stephen, the Presiding Officer, takes command of the space.

Fred Norris, a voter, looks on from the booths, clutching his paper.

Stephen Madam?

Pravin Shah, another voter, is frozen midway through dropping his ballot inside the ballot box.

Pravin Should I not –?

Stephen Sir, just remain where you are for a moment.

Grace is stretching, trying to reach her ballot paper on the floor nearby, and can’t.

Grace Ow. Get away from my slip, don’t look.

Kirsty No one’s looking.

Grace It’s face up, I can see the cross.

Jonathan Clarke, 17, enters in school uniform, looking around. Surprised to see –

Laura Oh, hi, the school’s closed, for the election, it’s a polling station today –

Jonathan This isn’t my school, it’s a primary school. Jesus, I’m not 8.

Grace Just – gimme a second, get my leg round, oh God . . .

Jonathan I was just – looking for my mates, they said . . .

Grace (pointing at Fred) You there. My slip.

Stephen Yes that’s right, you slipped, that’s right.

Grace Why is he talking to me like I’m a child, I know I slipped, my slip.

Kirsty Ballot paper.

Grace Turn it over. Him; don’t want you lot looking.

Jonathan Is she alright?

Stephen Everyone just stay where they are – (at Fred) Sir? Would you mind, just turning this lady’s ballot paper face down, for a second, then we can get her off the floor?

On Fred, clutching his ballot, confused. Looking at everyone looking at him. He looks at the ballot paper on the floor. And slowly starts to bend.

Grace (pointedly) No looking. Just turn . . .

Fred pauses. And then carries on, slowly, keeping his eyes on Grace. He turns the ballot paper over, face down, the other way. Beat . . .

Grace Well help me up, then.

Stephen Yes, of – (helping)

Fred I didn’t look.

Kirsty No, we know, thank you.

Grace (to Stephen as he ‘handles’ her) Oi you, just be lifting, don’t be feeling.

Stephen I – I’m not feeling.

Kirsty Stephen?

Stephen I’m not feeling, for God’s –!

Laura (to Jonathan) Name and address?

Jonathan Jonathan Clarke, middle name Michael, Jonathan Michael Clarke.

Stephen How is it, did you sprain anything ‘Mrs . . .?’

Kirsty Botchway.

Jonathan I’m not registered.

Laura Oh.

Jonathan I’m 17.

Laura Ri – . . . Right.

Grace is up on her feet, wincing at her ankle.

Grace It’s Grace, there’s no ‘Mrs’, cause there’s no ‘Mr’.

Stephen Right – Laura, is the young man –?

Laura Yes, I’m –

Jonathan (to Laura) Could have voted in the Scottish Referendum, 17. Except I wasn’t Scottish, so –

Laura Right, yeah, no, bad luck. Well unless you’re accompanied, by a grown-up, then sorry you’ll have to wait outside, I’m afraid, sorry.

Grace bends down and collects her ballot paper.

Grace I didn’t mean to get – it’s just private, isn’t it.

Jonathan saunters out. Fred goes back to the booth to vote.

Grace They know everything about you these days, don’t they, online and everything, but not this.

Pravin with his vote, above the ballot box. Grace is sorting herself out.

Pravin (to Stephen) Alright to do this now, then?

Stephen Oh, yes of course, please. I didn’t mean to delay you, just –

Pravin (Votes.) I’m actually next door. It’s my shop.

Stephen Right. Stephen. Crosswell. Presiding Officer for this polling station.

Kirsty Alright, Mr Shah, it’s Kirsty. I pop in at the weekend, my brother-in-law lives on –

Pravin Oh yes, Sunday Mirror.

Kirsty Oh, no sorry, you can’t say that in here, this is meant to be a politically neutral space. Right, Stephen?

Grace limps to the box.

Pravin Always lose business, when the school closes. No kids buying crisps; fizzy pop.

Stephen Sorry to hear that.

Pravin Make it up a little with those who don’t normally come this way, just to vote. One guy bought a bottle of Pinot Noir, today, we never normally shift any of that.

Stephen Oh Pinot Noir, right, lovely.

Grace drops her ballot paper into the box. To Grace, as she approaches the box.

Pravin Do you need anything from the shop, my sweetheart? I’ve got some gel for sprained ankles, paracetamol if you want to pop some pills?

Grace I’m fine, thank you.

Pravin nods and exits.

Grace Do you have a bathroom? I want to sort myself out.

Stephen Er, we wouldn’t normally – but no, of course, it’s just . . . Down on the right. Laura, perhaps you could – while there’s no –

Laura Yeah, no problem. This way.

Laura hops over and leads her out, exiting.

Fred puts his ballot paper in the box and makes his way out.

Stephen Thank you. (Off his look . . .) For your help.

Fred considers this, before wandering out.

Kirsty (wandering to the spot) She didn’t slip on anything, did she? There’s nothing slippy, look.

Kirsty slides her feet about a bit, checking.

God when she went down, I saw it, I thought, shit she’s dead.

Stephen These things happen. (Going to the sundries table as Laura returns.) I’ll grab one of Anita’s contact cards. And we should write it up in the logbook.

Kirsty Oh she’s fine, let’s not stir anything up.

Stephen It’s only fair, in case she wants to follow through – I mean follow up, not follow through. God, ‘Dr Freud on line two’? Haha. Long day. Kirsty, logbook?

Laura I don’t mind doing it.

Kirsty You’re alright, it’s your first time. I mean unless you want to.

Laura No, that’s OK. I mean, actually yeah, can I?

Kirsty Yeah course, here.

Laura Just so, in the future –

Voter 1 enters and approaches the desk.

Kirsty I remember last year – not last year; yeah it was last year, local and Europeans –

(Taking the Voter’s card.) Thank you.

She carries on talking while finding the corresponding name, address and then number in the register.

There was this poll clerk somewhere towards Kennington; ‘784’.

Laura ‘784’.

Kirsty And this clerk, she had someone have an aneurism in one of the booths, dropped dead, just like that.

Laura (handing the first Voter their ballot paper, folded and then unfolded) There, if you’d like to vote over there and then fold and pop in the box.

Voter 1 heads to the Voting Booth.

Kirsty And honestly, this same clerk year before that, or whenever, she had someone else come in and have a heart attack.

Laura Oh God.

Kirsty I bet no one wanted her this year, Stephen – do you? I reckon none of the Presiding Officers would touch her. Like she’s bad luck or something.

(Voter 1 heads to the ballot box.) You can never properly shake it, something like that. It’s like Chlamydia, leaves a trace.

Voter 1 turns to look at Kirsty, then exits.

Stephen OK, well 84 minutes to go, we’ve had a good innings so far, let’s just get our head down for the final furlong – is that what I mean, furlong? I’m mixing my sport metaphors again, aren’t I?

Kirsty (shaking Haribo jar) Who’s been eating all the greens? I bring them in for everyone and they’re the only ones I like; because they’re apple, green Haribos, aren’t they, and most green sweets are lime, which are disgusting, so –

Stephen No one’s been eating the greens, Kirsty.

Laura (beat) I get those boxes of dried fruits to pick at, at work.

Kirsty Dried fruit in the council leader’s office, Stephen. Don’t get that in our departments.

Laura I do bring them in myself, incidentally.

Stephen I’m about halfway through counting the unused ballots, it would be great to have all the accounts done and the box in the back of my Citroen for 10.45. Charlie Russell wants to announce the count at 2 this year, finally beat Southwark.

Kirsty ‘Southwark’, ‘booo’. S’quite nice actually, some of it.

Laura I know I keep saying it, I just still find that all a bit, I dunno, weird. This desire to count them ‘fast’, rather than – getting it right. Especially when we’re a key marginal, need to take care, don’t we?

Stephen Of course, but I don’t want it to be delays at this station that means the count is waiting for us. If the count waits for our box, the Returning Officer waits to announce the seat, and so on and so on.

Jerome Hanikie enters, dressed in his take-away uniform, passing Stephen by the door.

Jerome Uh, so I don’t have my card.

Stephen That’s OK, you don’t need it. Just your name and address.

Jerome arrives at the issuing desk.

Jerome 19 Parks Avenue. Jerome Hanikie. Need me to spell it?

Kirsty That’s not necessary, sir.

Jerome (to Stephen) Them clipboard guys outside, they asked for my card.

Stephen Yes, they’re tellers.

Jerome Why, who they going to tell?

Stephen Just – themselves, really. They’re from their local parties, Labour, and Lib Dem. They’re trying to see if any core voters haven’t turned up, so they can go door knocking later.

Laura There you go.

Jerome Never normally outside are they, them guys?

Stephen This year we’re – everyone’s, more interested.

Jerome goes to the booth.

Kirsty Oh we’ve angled again, Laura, I’m too far away, can we ‘udge’ up?

Laura and Kirsty are seated on a vaulting horse from the school gym.

Laura Yep, one two three –

They hop up off the seat and tug the bench forward, sitting back down. Jerome votes and exits.

There, logbook done.

Kirsty Back on the sundries table, Laura. That wasn’t me telling you what to do –

Laura Kirsty, honestly, I keep saying . . . In here, we’re all – you know.

Grace is coming back in from the toilets.

Stephen (to Grace) Oh. How’d it go?

Grace What, do you want chapter and verse? Fine.

Stephen (handing Grace her shopping and a card) Here you are, these are the contact details of Anita Smith, our Deputy Returning Officer, if, you know, you want to make a –

Grace Oh, don’t bother with that. It was already sprained, last week. ‘Should know better’, right?

Jerome returns from outside, pointing at Kirsty.

Jerome Nah! I knew I recognized you.

Kirsty (pleased) Oh, here we go, yep.

Jerome You’re Axe Lady!

Kirsty Oh, that’s new, other people have been saying Cat Woman, but –

Grace (to Stephen) What’s he saying, who is she?

Stephen No it’s – just a silly thing, on the internet, this morning.

Jerome (showing Grace the video clip on his phone) Check out this vine! It’s cr-azy.

Grace (looking, gasping) It’s a video, of you!

Kirsty Yes, it is. (Video restarts.)

Grace And again. (Laughing.) You look so funny! (Once it stops.) Why are you swinging an axe?

Kirsty We were locked out the school this morning, and we legally have to be open at 7, so I got an axe and I smashed the door in! I didn’t see the cat watching otherwise I would have shooed it away, you know, for safety.

Jerome Your face! It’s like – (Jerome laughs, doing an impression of Kirsty in the video.) Argh!

Stephen Alright, well, if you’d like to – (gesturing towards the exit)

Grace (on her way out, laughing) So funny. (She exits.)

Jerome Yo this time some girl with a clipboard asked which way I voted, I thought it was private.

Stephen It is, they’re just – that’s an exit pollster.

Jerome So I can tell her?

Stephen You can do what you like.

Jerome Well I just thought I’d let you know, in case.

Stephen No, I know.

Jerome (misinterpreting, affronted) Trying to do a good deed, you know. If people still do that.

Stephen No, of course, I know. (Beat.) Thank you.

Jerome Later axe lady. Keep swinging! (Exits.)

Kirsty (after him) I will. (Beat, to Laura.) That wasn’t rude was it –

Laura No –

Kirsty No. Bit hard not to let it all go to my head, to be honest.

Stephen Well like I’ve said, best not to bring it up with voters, ideally.

Kirsty I didn’t bring it up, they brought it up –

Stephen I just wish it hadn’t been shared without checking to see if – that’s all.

Kirsty I didn’t share it, my son did. And it was Laura that filmed it.

Laura Oh, well, yes for – on your phone.

Stephen It’s fine. I’m just saying. This year, tight race, lots of pressure to get it right, it doesn’t look the most . . . well dignified, does it. But –

Laura From a council PR point of view, if I can put that hat on for a moment, it’s not all bad, in fact at least it looks – passionate, like you cared, about upholding the principles of – everything. (With her phone.) Lot of positive noises from the council.

Kirsty Really?

Stephen All I care about is doing this right, and people feeling comfortable to come here and vote without being distracted by some – by what looks like, some mad woman with an axe. Anyway . . .

Laura (yawns) Long day, these four walls, 13 hours nearly now.

Stephen Against the European time directive, of course. Ironically, in this bastion of democracy.

Laura Think how many of us there must be, up and down the land.

Kirsty (stretching) Doesn’t help, sitting on this thing, no back on it, all day.

Stephen (looking outside) Another quiet patch. (his watch) EastEnders finished over half an hour ago, might get a rush. That’s been 30 years, hasn’t it. ’85? How many general elections is that? EastEnders?

(Stephen starts singing the EastEnders closing ‘duff duffs’ at the piano. Kirsty and Laura join in for the final beats. Stephen plays and makes up a song to the theme tune of EastEnders).

Thatcher, Major, Blair, Blair, Blair.

Cameron-needed-Clegg,

And this time, well who knows?

The other two chuckle and give him a round of applause.

Laura I’m quite excited, for 10, the exit poll. Got it spot on last time, didn’t they. Not many nights like this, where you get to wonder what ‘tomorrow might be’.

Kirsty It will be what it always is. Unfair. Just a different kind.

Laura Really, you’re not a ‘believer’, Kirsty, even though you do all this?

Kirsty Oh well this is just a laugh, isn’t it. ‘Social’. And double pay. Keep your wage at the council, get a wage doing this, win-win.

Laura I feel quite, I dunno, honoured, if that doesn’t sound . . . to be contributing. To my community, playing my part.

Kirsty Not your community though, is it. You’re up in – where are you again? North of the river. (Sucking on a Haribo.) Do you have aspirations of ‘high office’?

Laura Me, no, I’m just – I’m the leader’s press advisor, I’m not a policy –. Although, yeah, a lot of MPs were advisors at some point, so –

Stephen tinkling a couple of the keys, thoughtfully.

Kirsty Play something, Stephen. He’s really good, he did this open mic thing for Red Nose day once.

Stephen Oh that was just . . . Oh I dunno.

Stephen plays a short burst of something old school at the piano, like –

(Singing.) ‘I have often walked, Down this street before

Dah-di-dah-dah, something, something, Quality Street before.

All at once –’

Tilde, a Swedish television journalist, enters and Stephen stops abruptly, smiling.

– Hiya.

Tilde Hello – (seeing Kirsty) Oh, it is you. And I saw the door, too. My card.

Kirsty Oh, no, we need your polling card, this is your business card.

Tilde No, actually, I’m – a reporter. From SNT, Svensk National television . . . Swedish television. We saw the video online –

Stephen Ooh, right, no, you can’t come in here if you’re a reporter.

Tilde I’m aware of the regulations, I left my cameraman outside –

Stephen goes to check outside, Kirsty comes out from behind the issuing desk.

Kirsty Cameraman? For me?

Tilde We’ve been at Westminster all day, which has been pointless, the one day no one is there! But my producers, they want the Big Ben, they want the ‘spires’. So – but people will love this. Would you mind? A little interview, Kirsty?

Kirsty ‘Kirsty’? – this is so, it’s mad, it’s – (Kirsty exits to investigate.)

Stephen No, sorry, she can’t leave her post, and I don’t want a member of our team subjected to that kind of scrutiny when –

Kirsty (offstage) Hello!

Tilde I will never understand why in this country you won’t allow the cameras in. It’s like ‘what are they hiding in there’? Like you are ashamed of it, or something.

Stephen More ‘protective’, of it. The anonymity, and –

Tilde Hiding it makes it unfamiliar to people. It isn’t a temple, you know. It won’t crumble if you take a picture. (Kirsty reenters.) Maybe at the end of today, for tomorrow?

Laura End of the day? Might be good for an interview? Stephen?

Stephen No, I’m sorry.

Kirsty Stephen!

Alexandra (Russian) and her wife Rochena arrive to vote, approaching the desk.

Stephen And now we have some genuine voters, so, if you wouldn’t mind. Kirsty?

Alexandra (Hands over her card.) Here you go. And this is my wife’s. (Laughing.) Eeek.

Kirsty Alexandra Peters. ‘912’.

Alexandra We’ve just been out to dinner. I had scallops.

Kirsty I don’t care. Right. Rochena Peters, ‘882’.

Alexandra Look, tiny chairs! It’s like Alice in Wonderland.

Laura (Handing Alexandra her ballot paper.) Here’s yours.

Rochena It’s a school, just a school.

Laura (Handing Rochena her ballot paper.) And here’s yours.

Alexandra Eek!

Rochena Sorry, she’s a bit giddy, it’s our anniversary.

Tilde (to Rochena and Alexandra) Congratulations! (to Stephen) Are you from . . . you sound Polish, or is it Russian?

Alexandra Yes, Russian.

Stephen (gesturing the exit to Tilde) If you wouldn’t mind . . .

Alexandra All these candidates . . .

Rochena (to Stephen) God, we take it for granted, don’t we.

Stephen Yes, I suppose we do.

Alexandra (crossing to booth) So strange, one of the oldest democracies in the world and this is where you come?

Tilde (being guided out by Stephen) It is rather odd, isn’t it? You have not upgraded to screens yet? Computers?

Stephen Nope still the HB pencils for us. They don’t leave a trail.

Tilde Uh huh . . . (Exits with Stephen).

Kirsty (to Laura) You got her card, right? Right. I’m getting Gerry down here, with my make-up and a jzûzjy top. (Texting).

Alastair enters and hands over his card.

Kirsty (to Alastair) Hello, thank you.

Alia enters, guiding in Three Voters (2, 3 & 4) she has rounded up earlier.

Alia Here we are, take your card to the desk there.

Voter 2 heads to the issuing desk and starts being processed by Kirsty. Voters 3 & 4 stand by the piano.

Laura (to Alastair) ‘1222’. Oop. All the ducks. ‘Quack’. Ha. Ahem.

Alastair takes his paper and moves away, looking at it, moving towards the door. Stephen returns.

Stephen Alia, you know the score, you’ve managed to stay outside all day, I’m not going to relax the rules now, so –

Alia This one needs a bit of help, that’s all. Just being a Good Samaritan.

Stephen You’re rounding up your stragglers, you mean.

Alia Just helping my dear ‘neighbours’ who said they’d vote for us and had obviously forgot, or are a little frail . . . All done with a smile, right, love? (taking Voter 2’s ballot and helping her to the booth.)

Kirsty Alright, hand in your polling cards, please. Voters 3 & 4 go to the issuing desk to get processed by Kirsty. Alastair is walking out with his ballot paper.

Stephen Oh, uh, over there, please sir, to vote.

Alastair Oh, I was just going to take it away, have a quick look.

Stephen Ah, you can’t leave the polling station with your ballot I’m afraid.

Alastair . . . But. It’s mine. Isn’t it?

Stephen Not, erm, not technically. Your vote is yours. But the ballot paper – that, that’s ours.

Voter 2 makes their way to the ballot box as Voter 3 heads to the voting booth.

Alastair I wanted to take my time with it, over the road, got a pint waiting.

Stephen You can take all the time you want. But, in here.

Rochena and Alexandra have come out of the booth, and pose for a selfie on their smartphone (Alexandra extending out a selfie stick) while they hold up their ballot papers. Voter 2 crosses upstage to sit next to the piano and Voter 4 heads to the voting booth. Fred, who voted earlier on, has re-entered and sits next to Voter 2.

Rochena OK, say democra-cheese.

Kirsty Ooh, no I’m sorry, that’s not allowed.

Alexandra It’s just a selfie.

Kirsty No, no ‘selfies’, not in here.

Alexandra and Rochena sigh, move aside and begin dismantling the selfie stick.

Alastair Sorry mate, but, I’ve decided I am gonna do that. I am taking it away. For like, a bit. Not long. I just reckon if there’s a problem with that, then, we should all know that’s apparently a problem, with that, you know?

Stephen I mean you – I will have to call the police.

Alastair Yeah. Maybe you will. I just think it’s a bit dodge, if that’s the system. That’s all. I’ll see you, anyway.

Alastair exits with his paper. Stephen gets his phone out.

Stephen Oh, for . . .

Alia Did you just let him walk out with it?

Alexandra (to Kirsty, placing her phone on the Issuing Desk and crossing to the ballot box to pose with Rochena) Can you take our photo then, please?

Stephen (to Alia) Yes, Alia. I did. (On the phone.) Kirsty, is everything . . .?

Kirsty No, no one can take it – yes, Stephen, I’ve got this – (Kirsty comes out from behind the desk.) I’m going to have to ask you to put your phone away, please.

Rochena OK it’s alright, it’s OK, we will, don’t everyone get all –

Stephen (on his phone) Oh, hi, yes, I’d like to report, erm . . . (He exits.)

Alexandra (over Stephen) But it’s my first ever vote! What’s the point of instagram, if not for this?!

Laura Sorry. Kirsty? (We hear the click of Alexandra’s camera.)

Kirsty Did you just take one?

Alexandra By accident. It will just be my foot.

Laura Kirsty, we’ve people waiting, if –

Kirsty One second, Laura. (To them.) Show me, please.

Laura (sighs. To Fred.) What’s your name please?

Alexandra (showing Kirsty a photo on her phone) That’s my brother.

Fred (Overhearing Alexandra.) Joe?

Alexandra (looking through her phone) And it’s fashionable to look down on Russian elections but this doesn’t feel exactly free. (Showing her phone.)

Laura (under Alexandra) Surname?

Fred (under Alexandra) Norris.

Laura (under Alexandra) And address?

Fred (Fred replies as Alexandra speaks) 14 Grenville Close.

Kirsty That’s me, that’s my leg.

Alexandra Well. It’s my phone, my photo.

Kirsty I’d like you to delete it, please.

Laura (to Fred) Right, here you go, just vote over there.

Fred looks a little confused at his sheet of paper and heads over.

Kirsty Been captured on camera enough today.

Kirsty goes back to the desk.

Alia Oi, Kirsty, saw that meme of you earlier. Bit weird.

(Voters 3 & 4 head to the ballot box to vote and then sit upstage by Voter 2.) (Alia exits.) Under this, when Alexandra votes, Rochena sneaks a quick pick on her phone.

Laura (to Rochena) Madam?

Rochena No, you’re alright, bye. (They exit.)

Laura I think they might have taken a photo, Kirsty.

Kirsty Oh for . . . end of the day, it’s like the witching hour, they all come out. Don’t mind Stephen if he seems a bit ‘brusque’ occasionally. (Texting Tilde.)

Laura Is he? Seems inhumanly calm, I thought, don’t know how he does it.

Kirsty Under a bit of pressure this year – I shouldn’t say, but, he’s in the running. For Anita’s job, Deputy Returning Officer.

Alia re-enters and the Voters stand up to leave.

Alia Alright?

Fred is by the ballot box. He looks at the queue of Voters, looking reminiscent of the 1979 Conservative campaign poster.

Fred Hah. Look. Queue. ‘Labour isn’t working’.

Kirsty What?

Fred ‘Labour isn’t working!’

Fred drops his ballot paper into the box, and Kirsty gasps, freezing.

Kirsty Wait, did you just –

Alia leaves with her Voters; Kirsty, Laura and Fred now alone.

Kirsty Sir, just a moment. Laura, he’s – you’re the gentleman who was just here, when that woman, ‘Mrs Botchway’, who fell – isn’t he? Remember?

Laura That’s him? From before? No –

Kirsty And he just voted, again. I saw him. But he can’t have done, we didn’t issue him another ballot paper.

Laura No, that can’t, that can’t have happened, because there’s no way that like, yeah, bollocks, OK yeah, no I did.

Kirsty What?

Laura I gave him one.

Kirsty What? How?

Laura He gave me his name, it wasn’t crossed out on the register.

Kirsty Didn’t you recognise him, from before?

Laura (At the register.) Look, see? Joe Norris, it wasn’t crossed off.

Kirsty Is that your name sir? What’s your full name?

Fred . . . Mine? Fred. Frederick Norris.

Laura He told me it was Joe; you told me Joe.

Fred My brother? Is he back from the shops, then?

Laura . . . Oh Jesus.

Fred He said he was going to meet me here. (Calling, on his way out.) Joe?

Kirsty Sir, wait, can you just . . .?

But he’s gone.

Laura (going to the box) And he posted it, he definitely posted it? We can’t like, get it out.

Kirsty ‘Get it out?!’ No, we can’t ‘get it out’.

Laura All papers have numbers on them, that’s why we do it, isn’t it? If we tell someone, they can remove it at the count.

Kirsty Fine, if you want people to know you were involved, in your position – ohmyGod, and people will know I was involved as well, oh God, and I text that reporter to come back.

Laura I don’t think that a Swedish television news programme is our main concern.

Kirsty Well you shouldn’t have issued the ballot paper. I’m sorry, I don’t mean to be . . . to someone, you know, ‘high up’, but it’s two people on the issue desk at all times –

Laura Well. Sorry to put the . . . back on you, a bit, Kirsty, but why did you leave the desk, when we had voters waiting?

Kirsty OK, look, just, look. It was an actual ballot, assigned and marked off, so the box and the register will still all balance, so, technically, there’s no problem.

Laura Except that – someone voted twice. And in a marginal constituency! Oh God! We have to tell Stephen.

Kirsty hears someone in the corridor.

Kirsty Wait, shush –

Alan, a polling agent for the Conservative Party, has arrived, humming as he enters.

Alan Alright, pull your socks up, the enforcer is here, haha.

Kirsty Oh hi, Alan. How’s it going? Laura, this is Alan, he’s a polling agent for one of the local candidates.

Alan Oh, fresh meat, nice, how do you do.

(Producing his authentication papers etc.) Just to make it all ‘official’ –

Kirsty Oh we know who you are.

Stephen (re-entering) Oh hi Alan.

Alan (holding his hands up, mockingly) Oh no, it’s the Presiding Officer sir, spare me, I have my papers here.

Stephen Oh there’s no need for –

Alan No, no, dot and cross, the Is and the Ts. I am here on behalf of Mr Adeyami Abudu, the Conservative candidate for this seat and I am legally allowed to be present at this polling station as a passive observer, etcetera.

Stephen Received and understood. How’s it going?

Alan Jesus, honestly, its headless chickens everywhere. I don’t think it’s ever going to have been this close before. No one has a bloody clue.

Laura (trying to hide her panic) Huh, erm. Actually I’m sorry, while it’s quiet, can I just -?

Stephen Uh, yes, of course. Quick as you can.

Laura exits, into the back corridor. Stephen replaces her at the desk.

Stephen She alright? Kirsty Yeah, just . . .

Alan All good here, then? Heard about the trouble opening up this morning . . .? I got forwarded your little movie, Kirsty, Jesus!

Stephen Oh yes, it’s not as dramatic as it looks. Happens all the time depressingly, in fact the council has a guy with a mallet on speed dial, every election. Unfortunately he was knocking down a church door in Stockwell, so Kirsty . . . ‘came to the rescue’. We were expecting you earlier, Alan, is he on his way, your chap?

Alan Oh don’t, this is my stupid idea, hasn’t worked, slapped wrist later. Local press were covering that UKIP bird, voting at the doctor’s surgery, so I thought, tactically, to get his face in the papers, we’d wait till later. But no one’s turned up. Still you live you learn.

Kirsty ‘Labour isn’t working’. What was that?

Alan Thatcher. ’79. Saatchi and Saatchi. Classic.

Kirsty . . . Right . . .

Tom Baird enters. He’s young but dressed in black tie and carrying a double bass.

Stephen Hello. Oh, look at that.

Tom Sorry?

Stephen Oh, no, I was just admiring your instrument. So to speak. Erm. Where have you been fiddling – God, it’s getting worse.

Kirsty ‘537’.

Stephen ‘537’. (handing him his paper) You can leave that with us briefly, that’s no problem.

Tom Oh. Thank you. It was just this, recital thing, for my Postgrad.

Stephen (helping him take off the bass) Let me –

Tom Cheers . . . Sort of a big deal, actually, heart’s still going. Months, practising. Well . . . years, when you think about it. Worried I wouldn’t make it here.

Kirsty receives a text message. Tom heads to the booth as the double bass starts to tip. Kirsty and Stephen react.

Oh, careful – it’s a bit . . . you need to . . . Sorry.

Stephen holds the double bass and Tom goes to the booth.

Kirsty Oh, my Gerry’s just parked up. Finally.

Alan He’ll be at the count, won’t he, Gerry?

Kirsty Oh yeah, that’s two double-times we get, from the council. And he loves counting, my husband, some reason, anything, loves it. Absolutely bizarre. One of the other regulars have put him on this moisturizing stuff, for his fingers. So he can, you know – (mimes counting slips of paper quickly) So there’s no chafing; chafing is the mortal enemy of the ballot paper counter.

Alan Fastest fingers in the west, is he?

Kirsty I’ve never complained. Oh God sorry, I forgot where I was then.

Alan (on his phone) Oh, this is Adey now, one sec. Adeyami, ‘ello, alright?

Gerry enters with a make-up bag, and a wrapped packet of fish and chips under his arm.

Oh, alright Gerry, we were just talking about you. (He exits).

Gerry Avon calling.

Kirsty (hopping up) Alright, not so – thank you. (The make-up bag.)

Stephen (at her make-up bag) What d’you need that for, Kirsty?

(Phone ringing.) Oh, this is the police, can you – Stephen exits on the phone. Gerry props up the double bass.

Gerry Haribos and a fancy top for you. I’ve got Lucas at home, waiting for his chips, then I’m off to the count. (Beat.) Why did he bring this with him, bit impractical?

Kirsty It isn’t his, you idiot, it’s his. (Quick beat.) Wait, a minute. That’s it, I’ve got it. You. You haven’t voted.

Gerry Oh, not this again –

Kirsty No, please Gerry, listen to me, you’re doing it. (At the register.)

Gerry I’m not, Kirsty, I can’t stand any of ’em. I don’t know why you register me every time.

Kirsty Because I’m a poll clerk and it’s . . . how does it make me look if . . . (With his paper.) Look, just a quick vote, it’ll really help me out. I’ll explain later. Please help me out this once?

Gerry (sighs, taking it) All the lads are talking about that video, you know. Winding me up . . .

Gerry reluctantly goes to the booth, leaving Kirsty now to prop up the double bass. Laura returns, looking slightly bewildered at the large instrument Kirsty is holding.

Laura Uh. . . alright?

Kirsty I’ve done something.

Laura Started a band?

Kirsty No. You’ll be pleased with me.

Stephen returns, hanging up the phone and takes the double bass from Kirsty.

Stephen Allow me.

Gerry pops his head out of the booth again, to get Kirsty’s attention. Kirsty opens the Haribo packet.

Tom leaves the booth and heads over to the box where Stephen now is.

Stephen sees Gerry and waves, thanking him.

. . . Tom thinks he’s waving at him, and waves back.

Tom Oh, hello.

Stephen Oh, no actually I was – at him, but – no I can wave at you too.

Gerry Oi. (Mouths to her, pointing at the paper: ‘Which one?’)

Tom is about to drop his ballot into the box – but stops. Hovering. Suddenly uncertain . . .

Stephen Voting Gerry?

Gerry Apparently.

Kirsty takes and holds up a red sweet. It takes Gerry a second or two to comprehend, before going back into the booth.

Stephen (to Tom) It’s OK. Just drop it in, it’ll be fine.

Tom No, I know, it’s just . . . How do you do it?

Stephen Erm. I just tend to – let go.

Beat. He drops the ballot inside the box. Tom goes to get his double bass.

Tom (taking his double bass from Stephen) Thank you.

Laura Oh it’s yours. That makes more sense.

Gerry comes out of the booth and comes to the box.

Gerry I’ll see you at the count.

Kirsty (to Gerry) Alright, thanks for that.

Gerry exits.

Tom (putting his double bass on) I mean it’s a not that different from my recital, is it. You talk about it non-stop, practise for months and months . . . and then it’s gone. In 17 minutes . . .

Like how many goes do you think we all get, at this? Once, every five years, so that’s maybe 10 votes, in a lifetime? If you’re lucky . . .?

Stephen . . . Although. This is not really a performance, is it?

Tom . . . No?

Laura heads to the door to open it for Tom.

Laura Stephen plays music, actually, don’t you Stephen? (To Tom.) If you ever need an accompanist.

Tom Um. Right.

Stephen holds the door open for him.

(Exiting.) Thank you, Stephen.

Stephen What was all that, ‘if you ever need’ –?

Laura Oh nothing, I just thought I sensed a – like, connection, or something . . . oh sorry if – I didn’t mean to presume that –

Alan returns. Laura returns to the Issuing Desk.

Alan (to Stephen) He’s on his way, my fella. T-minus 20 and counting.

Kirsty (to Laura) I’ve sorted it. You’re welcome.

Alan shows Stephen some photos on his phone.

Alan Here, Stephen, look at this, I’m tracking his taxi on my phone.

Stephen Oh! (Stephen joins Alan.)

Laura So, you told – (indicating Stephen)?

Alan Amazing, see?

Kirsty My husband just . . . brought in some more sweets. He never normally bothers with sweets. But I got him to pick a red one.

Alan Here, took these photos earlier, at HQ. Good turnout.

Kirsty (quieter) Red’s the opposite flavour, to that ‘Labour isn’t working’ man.

Alan Remember her, Val? (Alan and Stephen sit.)

Kirsty aware of the men, picking up sweets to demonstrate for Laura.

Kirsty That man’s favourite sweet was obviously blue. So I got Gerry to put an extra red one, in the jar.

Stephen Oh, please Kirsty, stop banging on about your sweets.

Kirsty I will! Haha, because (pronounced, for Laura), all the Right Sweets are now In The Jar.

Laura In the jar? (Beat – the penny drops.) Oh . . . the jar.

. . . Yes, but Kirsty, in this particular ‘jar’, . . . (holding up the corresponding sweets) this jar is between red and yellow, so like, numbers wise, the opposite ‘flavour’ to blue – . . . berry, which no one is really picking in this jar, the opposite would be, like . . . green.

Alan passes by, taking the green sweet and popping it in his mouth.

Alan Go on then, Laura. One won’t hurt.

Laura Hah, right, hah. (Back to Kirsty.) But, do you see? If you put an extra red one, in the jar, that isn’t fair on the yellows. Because those two flavours are basically neck and neck. Do you see?

Kirsty . . . What? (Thinks.) Hold on. Hold on. OK, yeah, shit.

Alan (back at Stephen) No Tory tellers outside? That speaks volumes. Still, time to turn on the charm, see if I can get any info out of the other two. (Exits.)

Kirsty Look, it’s alright. Gerry can bring my son down. He can come and eat a yellow one.

Laura Your son? No, Jesus, no, let’s just –

Kirsty Stephen, time for my toilet break now, is that OK?

Stephen Yes, of course.

Laura Kirsty, Kirsty, wait –

Stephen comes and joins Laura at the desk.

Kirsty (on the phone, as she leaves) Gerry? Can you back here now, please.

Kirsty exits at speed as Voter 5 enters.

END OF PART ONE: (For the theatre audience: the play continues in these breaks, with more private moments between the polling station staff.)

Theatre Only 1

Stephen Hello – (taking Voter 5’s card) Ah, thank you. Dum-de-dum . . . there you are, ’181’.

Laura ‘181’, (handing over their paper) Thank you.

Laura drops the ballot and apologises to the Voter. The Voter goes to the booth.

Laura Stephen, erm, there’s something I think . . .

Stephen Yep? Are you – alright?

She stands, pacing. Breathing.

Laura Yeah. No I will be, just need to . . . I don’t know. You know?

Stephen It’s alright. Have a – pace around, if you want.

I had this ex, his technique was the toes. When he felt an attack coming. He used to say the panic, it was like somersaults.

Laura . . . It’s – a new thing. I’m . . . I’ll get used to them. I am used to them.

Voter 5 has voted, and exits the station.

Stephen (to the Voter) Thank you. (To Laura.) Do you know what I’ve been fantasising about doing all day?

Stephen hops over to the back where some school gym equipment is and rolls out 2 hoola hoops.

Laura You’re not serious? Someone might –

Stephen Come on, let our hair down, one quick spin – here.

He gives one hoop to Laura.

Laura Alright, I must warn you I was captain of our gymnastics team at school. Well, assistant captain. Why am I lying, none of that is true. Anyway –

She swings the hoop around her waist and begins spinning.

Laura Whoop –

Stephen Not bad. What do you – side to side?

Laura Back and forth – well, I do anyway, you sort of shift your weight.

Stephen has a go. They go back and forth, at will, during the ensuing.

Laura I don’t know how you do it. You seem so in control, and calm in here, it’s a little unnerving.

Stephen Always been good at biting my tongue, that’s all.

Laura I think partly it’s the not knowing who or what is going to come through that door next, that’s the exciting thing and also the, I don’t know, discombobulating thing. When’s the next person going to arrive? Now.

Snaps her fingers. And waits. Nothing.

Now.

Snaps her fingers. Nothing.

Oh well, my psychic abilities are worse than my hoola-hooping skills.

Stephen Hah. Although saying that, this time, fixed-term parliament. The 7th May, 2015, has been ingrained on my brain for the past five years. So – maybe this time, even just psychologically, I feel more prepared.

Laura For the day itself, not the outcome.

They drop the hoops as Paul Alleyne enters, dressed in his work overalls. Laura puts the hoops away as they return to the desk.

Stephen Evening, do come in.





Part Two

The polling station – 9.01pm.

Paul Alleyne is approaching the Issuing Desk.

Paul Uh yeah I don’t have my, erm –

Stephen That’s OK, just – oh, Kirsty’s back, she’ll be able to – one moment.

Kirsty comes back in, replacing Stephen at the desk. She has noticeably more make-up on.

Kirsty I’m back, I’m back, I can relieve you Stephen. Now that I have ‘relieved’ myself. Name and address, please?

Paul Paul Alleyne, 19a Bishops Road.

Stephen (looking at Kirsty’s face) Oh. Planning on – going out, after this? Kirsty?

Kirsty No, why do you say that?

Stephen Oh, nothing. Just . . .

Kirsty (to Paul) I don’t have you, I’m afraid. You’re sure this is the polling station you registered at?

Paul Yeah. Well. My wife came in this morning, or I assume it was this one.

Kirsty I’m sorry, you’re not on the register.

Paul (taking out his phone) Lemme check.

Stephen We’ll have to ask you to make that call outside, if that’s OK.

Paul Yeah, yeah, yeah.

(exiting, on the phone) Hi, where did you vote this morning? . . . No, where? Not who, I’m not asking . . . I said where? For – (Exits.)

Kirsty Didn’t miss anything, did I?

Laura/Stephen No, no.

Jasmine, Carla, two college students, enter with Jonathan the lad in uniform from before.

Jasmine Oh my days! It looks exactly the same!

Carla It’s like Ghost, innit. It’s the smell –

Jasmine/Carla The smell –

Carla – brings back memories and shit.

Jasmine Ohmygod, look – (at Kirsty) It is her.

Laura (at Jonathan) Oh. Back again? You haven’t turned 18 in the last 20 minutes, have you?

Jasmine Shame!

Jonathan Shut up. Her, not you.

Jasmine Hi. I’m here to vote, what do you do?

Kirsty You give me your card. (Jasmine hands over her card) And I’ll take yours as well.

Carla (in American) Thanks Axe Lady. Pff.

Kirsty Hello, ’239’.

Laura ‘239’. (handing Jasmine and Carla their papers) There you go.

Carla That’s it? You don’t need I.D. or nothing?

Jasmine (at the desk) So now what?

Laura Go to the booth, take a pencil, and put a cross next to the person you’re voting for.

Jasmine goes to booth #1. Carla goes to Booth #2.

Carla Pencils?

Jasmine (to the booth) This is so old school. It’s like the ’90s or something.

Alan returns, and joins Stephen.

Kirsty (To Jonathan.) Excuse me, you’ll have to wait outside if you’re not voting.

Jonathan She said I could be in here with . . . if I was like, accompanied, by . . .

Jasmine (from the booth) A grown-up?

Jonathan Yeah.

Jasmine/ Carla Pfff! (Laughing).

Carla Ah that’s OK, Johnnie, we’ll be your grown-ups.

Alan So, is this true, Stephen, what I hear? You being in line for ‘great things’? Anita’s position, Deputy Returning?

Stephen Yeah I’m not confident to be honest. I’m up against – you know. ‘Modernisers’. ‘Reformers’. ‘How do we get more people in through the door?’

Alan (to Stephen) So bloody what, you’re old school, I like that.

Stephen I’m just never going to think a ‘sexy app’ or ‘online this or that’ is what’s stopping people walking through that door. Look, there’s no wall or anything, blocking the door, is there? If they’re not coming . . . then it’s something else.

Paul has returned from outside.

Paul (to Kirsty) Uh yeah, so she, she definitely voted here this morning.

Kirsty Same name?

Jasmine (to Laura, with her form) ‘scuse me, sorry, is this right, the Prime Minister isn’t even on here.

Laura Right, so, this isn’t the Prime Minister’s seat.

Jasmine goes back to the booth.

Kirsty (to Paul) Did you definitely register yourself, only it changed this year – it’s individuals now, that register, not households.

Paul But she’d have put me down, wouldn’t she?

Jasmine (going back to Laura) Right, so . . .

Laura These /are the candidates standing for this constituency. That’s who you’re voting for, not the Prime Minister.

Kirsty (overlapping) No but that’s what I’m saying. She wouldn’t have done, cause it’s changed. Stephen? This gentleman is sure he registered, I’m trying to explain about the new thing, with the thing.

Jasmine returns to the voting booth.

Stephen Yes, I’m sorry, we’ve been having a lot of similar – today. Unless you registered yourself, on an individual form, then . . . Let me call the local office and get them to check the database –

Paul stands by the piano.

Stephen exits on his phone. Carla and Jasmine both go to Laura.

Carla So, look, sorry, is there like, information on which one’s which?

Laura No sorry, we can’t give out any information once you’re inside the polling station.

Jasmine Well so how do you find out about anything?

Carla Let’s just google them.

Kirsty No, you can’t do that, you’re meant to have informed yourself before you come in.

Jasmine Ugh, it’s like an exam. No wonder they’re in schools.

Carla (We hear the Siri noise. Into her phone) Siri, who should I vote for?

Kirsty No, seriously, I mean it, that’s enough!

Jonathan (to Carla) What’s wrong with you?

Kirsty (to Jonathan) Please can you wait over there, please.

Carla Be nice to him, he’s our GBF, and we’re his fag hags.

Jonathan Oi, don’t . . . (aware of Paul next to him) don’t say that. They go back to the booth.

Jonathan shuffles, stood next to Paul, the tall older man next to him. Beat.

Paul Reminds me of being back at school. Waiting at the headmaster’s office. Feels like we’re in trouble, ey?

Jonathan Uh, dunno. I’m not gay. What they said. Not like, ‘much’, I mean.

Paul . . . Oh. OK. All up for grabs, though, I suppose. Growing up.

Alan (joining them) On your way from work, is it, long day?

Paul I wish, on my way to work; nightshift. Didn’t expect anyone else’d be voting this late, thought I’d be on my own.

Alan Oh yeah, no, constant stream, my experience.

Kirsty Haribo, Alan?

Alan I shouldn’t. (To Paul.) The wife, she’s – got us on this thing . . .

Paul 5:2?

Alan Yeah.

Paul Nightmare.

Jonathan (feeling like he should join in with the men) Yeah.

The other two look at him. Beat.

Jasmine and Carla come out of the booth and show Laura and Kirsty their ballot papers. They avoid looking at the papers and send them to the ballot box to post their votes.

Carla (the ensuing at speed – overlapping a lot with Jasmine) Wait, me first –

Jasmine Go on then, do it –

Carla Which way, it won’t –

Jasmine Any way, come on, do it –

Carla Awh this is proper stuff. Your turn, make a wish –

Jasmine Pssh, s’not my birthday, ‘make a wish’ – (Votes.)

They both turn to Jonathan, waiting exasperated.

Jonathan First-time voters.

Jasmine Alright you, let’s get you home to bed, ha-ha.

Jonathan Piss off.

The girls leave. Jonathan has one last look back at the men.

Jonathan See ya.

Paul Yeah, see ya.

Jonathan and co. exit.

Stephen (returning to Paul) There’s no record of you registering, I’m very sorry.

Paul Right. I thought she’d done us both but obviously.

He exits. Gerry returns, with son Lucas moodily in tow.

Lucas Mum, what the hell?

Kirsty Right, number one Lucas, what have I told you about disrespecting me, number two, get over here before I slap you. Laura, ‘1334’.

Stephen What’s going on?

Kirsty Nothing, this is my son, Lucas. Laura, do you have his ballot paper?

Lucas (flirtatiously) So, Laura? I’ve seen you around, haven’t I?

Laura Uh, don’t think so.

Kirsty Lucas.

Lucas You get the 219, don’t you; where do you live?

Kirsty In her house, Lucas. ‘1334’.

Lucas Mum, I don’t want to, I told you, I’m not. You’re propping up an outdated, undemocratic system and I don’t believe in it, no offence.

Kirsty Don’t you give me that Russell Brand shit.

Lucas You got me the book at Christmas!

Kirsty I didn’t know what it was about!

Lucas Some Swedish girl Facebooked me, she wants to interview you.

Kirsty That’s not a girl that’s a woman and – thank you for facilitating that, I appreciate it. Laura? (She takes the ballot paper from Laura.) Here.

Lucas Thank you, Laura.

Gerry Kirsty, if he doesn’t wanna vote, he doesn’t wanna to vote, same as me.

Lucas No, you don’t cause you’re lazy, I want to send a message.

Gerry Oi. Don’t you dare. That’s not –

Stephen Is everything alright?

Kirsty Yes, my son’s just about to cast his first ever vote; it’s a touching family moment, get in there. Please, for me.

Lucas What’s in it for me?

Alan Blimey, this one’s got some spunk.

Lucas You what?

Alan Spunk! What, don’t people say spunk anymore?

Kirsty Magaluf, do this and – you can go . . . we’ll let you go. How’s that?

Gerry Uh we won’t.

Kirsty We’ll talk about it later, he can go.

Gerry No we won’t, he’s not going.

Lucas Stop third-personing me. I’m right here.

Gerry He’s not old enough.

Lucas What does that mean?

Stephen Guys –

Gerry It means you’ll behave stupid and you’ll hurt yourself.

Lucas Old enough to choose who runs the country, not old enough to go on holiday, what’s that about? Right.

Lucas takes the ballot and goes to booth #2, smiling at Laura as he does.

Kenneth and Louisa, two married financiers, enter. He’s constantly emailing on his Blackberry.

Kirsty And – what I said on the phone, about . . . (checks Stephen isn’t watching, holds up a yellow sweet from the new bag and drops it into the jar).

Lucas Ye-es, I’ve got it, don’t have to be Turing to crack your code.

Kirsty Don’t push your luck, Lucas. (Kenneth clears his throat.) Hello.

Kenneth hands over his card.

Kirsty (awaiting a response) ‘Hello’?

Kenneth Uh, I . . . thought I smiled, didn’t I? Like, smiled ‘hello’.

Kirsty My mistake, sorry.

Kenneth Sorry, I didn’t mean to be . . . (at his watch) we’re just late . . .

Louisa (handing her card to Kirsty) That’s a dig at me, for leaving the office late.

Kenneth It wasn’t a – . . . bloody hell, getting attacked on both fronts here (to Kirsty) for not talking (to Louisa) and talking (going back to his phone).

Laura (handing them their papers) There you are, just in the booth.

Kenneth No, you’re alright. (Picking up a pencil and marking his ballot.)

Laura Right.

Louisa (to Kirsty as she’s given her polling card back) Thank you. (To Laura as she’s handed her ballot paper.) Thanks so much.

Laura hands Louisa her ballot paper and Louisa goes to Booth #1.

Kenneth goes to the ballot box to vote. Lucas follows behind him. He’s over by the box, with his slip.

Lucas Mum? I’m sorry. But you did tell me to stand up for my beliefs.

Lucas tears the paper in two.

Kirsty Lucas!

Lucas drops his ripped paper in the ballot box.

Stephen We have a special envelope for spoilt ballot papers, that’s – that’s a little annoying, being in the box, to be honest.

Lucas Mum. Don’t hate me. (Heading out.) Bye, Laura.

Kirsty You, just go! We’ll talk in the morning. God, I’m embarrassed.

Maria enters. She speaks in careful English, Portuguese is her first language.

Gerry Am I officially off duty now as well, then? I’ll see you later. I’m out for the count. Ey, Alan? Out for the count? (He exits.)

Alan Yes. (Phone rings.) Oh, arse, sorry Stephen, thought it was on silent.

Alan answers and exits.

Maria (handing in her card) Here. Uh . . .

Kenneth has voted very quickly and goes over to the box, dropping it in. He picks up a phone call.

Maria goes to Booth #4.

Stephen Thank you, goodnight.

Kenneth (on the phone) Yeah, coming out now . . .

Stephen Oh, could put your phone away?

Kenneth Oh, I’m just – waiting for my . . . (phone) Just circle round again then –

Stephen Sir, sorry –

Kenneth (to Stephen) Yeah, no, totally – (phone) Bayswater, near Bayswater – (to Stephen) totally, yep, I’m just – (phone) yep, we’ll be out by the time you’re – yep. (Hangs up, starts emailing) Got an Uber outside, we’re late for this dinner thing. (Looking at Louisa in the booth.) God, what’s she doing? . . .

Stephen I really would like you to put your phone away, sir

Kenneth I’m just seeing where it is . . . (approaching) Darling, the Uber’s here. I’m not rushing you –

Louisa looks out from the booth – it’s clear she’s a little upset under her steely reserve.

Louisa One minute.

Stephen Sir, don’t disturb other voters.

Kenneth She’s not another voter, she’s my wife.

Stephen Perhaps you would like to take a seat –

Kenneth There’s no need, she’s coming –

Louisa (stepping out of the booth, forcefully) Look. I am going to have just a couple of seconds over here, to myself, quietly, just for once, with my own thoughts in peace, and so you’re going to have to decide to be OK with sitting there, quietly, just for once, in peace as well. Without, for once, constantly being on, staring at or playing with your bloody phone. Alright?

Kenneth raises his hands in defence, and sits on the bench.

Stephen Is everything . . .?

Kenneth Yeah, she just. Had a. Thing this week. Her dad. She’ll be . . . having a. Moment. Everything I say is the wrong, like . . . (sighs).

Louisa I can still hear you, Kenneth.

Kenneth I’m sitting, look. Sat. Quiet.

Louisa takes a deep breath in the booth, calming down.

Laura (quietly to Kirsty) So, about the whole erm –

Kirsty Look. I think you might just have to do a Frozen and Let It Go.

Maria (Comes to the issuing desk from polling booth) Uh, you can tell me . . .

Kirsty Everything you need to know should be on there.

Maria Sorry. Erm, it’s . . . How do you say . . . (Portuguese) ‘Estou a procura do candidato socialista.’ (‘I’m looking for the socialist candidate’.)

Kirsty What language is that?

Maria It’s Portuguese, I’m just –

Stephen (with his phone) I’ve got the translation line on the phone.

Kenneth Is it like a dentist’s, anything to read?

Stephen (on the phone) 2 . . .

Kenneth Country Life or something?

Kenneth begins tapping his knees, bored.

Stephen (on the phone) 5 . . . Yes . . . (with the phone, to Maria) Here, speak to them. Then pass back to me.

Maria (taking the phone) Uh it – music.

Stephen Yes, you’re on hold.

Kenneth Wait, how come she’s allowed to use her phone?

Stephen Well because that’s – my phone.

Maria (still with the phone. To Stephen, in Portuguese) ‘Qual é o equivalente ao Partido Socialista.’ (‘Who are the Partido Socialista equivalent?’)

Kenneth Uh, (repeating Maria) ‘Partido Socialista’, she’s looking for the –

Stephen You speak Portuguese?

Kenneth No, Spanish. Well, just bits and . . . (Spanish) ‘Cómo vas a tener un voto si –’ (‘How do you even have a vote, if . . .’)

Maria (Portuguese) ‘Oh, o meu pai é Britanico, nunca o conheci. Dois passaportes, mas sempre vivi em Portugal. Tu podes dizer-me qual destes é o candidato socialista?’ (‘Oh, my father was British, never met him. Two passports, but always lived in Portugal. Can you tell me which one the socialist candidate is?’)

Kenneth ‘Socialista’, I think she wants to know which is the socialist candidate.

Laura Oh crumbs, well that’s a minefield.

Maria ‘Nao me digas que nao ha un Partido Socialista.’ (‘Don’t tell me there isn’t a Socialist Party.’)

Kirsty Just say there isn’t one.

Kenneth (Spanish) ‘Diría que lo más cercano possible es el Partido Laboral, o el Verde.’ (‘I would say the closest is possibly Labour, or Green.’)

Stephen What are you saying to her, no, sorry, you can’t be giving advice.

Maria (hears someone on the phone. Portugese) ‘Ah, olá, sim . . .’ (‘Oh, hello, yes . . .’)

Kenneth I’m not, I’m just translating.

Stephen (taking the phone) Hello, can you tell her we’re not allowed to give advice, we’re very sorry. (Handing Maria the phone.)

Kenneth Born here, grew up there. Dual passport. She said.

Maria ‘Obrigada.’ (handing the phone back to Stephen.)

Kenneth (Louisa leaves the booth.) Ah, right.

Maria Thank you. (She saunters to the booth.)

Stephen Impressive. Spanish. Go on a lot of holidays, do you?

Kenneth Oh, I had a . . . we work in finance, we I had a . . . out there, during the . . .

Louisa Yes, my husband is one of the ones you read about who did well out of the whole thing. Shorting the debt, etcetera. You’re probably the reason she’s here actually, trying to find work. Funny old world.

Kenneth You needed that much time to put a cross next to the same people you always put a cross next to?

Louisa Yes. I did. Can we go or would you like to try out your cod Spanish on any other young girls?

Kenneth I wa – . . . they asked me!

She leaves.

And now she’s gone. Right. (He exits after her.)

Fred comes back into the room.

Fred Joe?

Kirsty Oh you are kidding me.

Fred Joe?

Alan returns from outside.

Alan Oi whoa there, fella. Stephen, it’s no biggie, just that the exit pollster said it’s the third time this chap has been in, I think he’s a bit . . . you know.

Stephen Oh yes. He was in earlier. Sir?

Alan They even said he’s claimed to have voted twice.

Kirsty/ Laura No –

Alan Well, no, of course. It’s alright, it’s OK, I’ll sort this. (To Fred.) Come on, sir.

Fred goes out with Alan. Voter 6 enters, Kirsty processing it under:

Laura (privately) Stephen –

Kirsty Laura, Laura, no . . . (to the Voter) Could I have your polling card, please?

Laura OK Stephen, I’m sorry. I’m really sorry. But that gentleman. (Aware of the Voter.) When he came in, a second time, we . . . I accidentally gave him another sweet. Even though you’re only allowed one.

Stephen You . . . (thinking he gets it . . .) You gave him two sweets? You . . . gave him two sweets.

Alan re-enters with Fred, holding Fred’s phone.

Alan Come on then, sir. Back inside. Not really getting sense out of him, but I’ve got his phone. I’ll look for a home number or emergency contact. OK for him to stay in here while I try?

Stephen A-huh, yeah . . .

Alan exits, leaving Fred to wander around the polling station.

Laura It was my fault, he gave me someone else’s name –

Stephen So, OK. OK. So there’s . . . OK.

Kirsty I nearly fixed it on my own by getting Gerry to put a red sweet in the jar, which is the opposite of a blue sweet, or I thought it was. But then Laura explained it wasn’t because it’s only red sweets and yellow sweets that are popular in this jar, so then I tried to get Lucas to eat a yellow sweet, I mean pick a yellow sweet, or like, drop a yellow sweet in, but he erm . . .

(As Voter 6 leaves.)

Well then he spoilt his ballot paper so there’s still one in the box that shouldn’t be there.

Laura Kirsty –

Kirsty She don’t care!

Stephen You . . . this man actually – had two sweets? That . . . that’s . . . shit.

Maria passing by towards the box, overhearing.

Maria (hearing this, laughing) Ha. ‘Shit’. I know that word. It’s very good.

END OF PART II:

Theatre Only 2

Maria exits.

Stephen slinks over to where Fred is . . .

Stephen You say blue – his two sweets, were blue. How do you know that?

Kirsty Well, we heard him. ‘Labour isn’t working’. He said.

Stephen You’re basing all of this on! – right. Right. First things first, Mr – Norris, is it? Laura, maybe we could get a cup of tea?

Laura Yes, yes, right, I’ll – yep.

Laura exits into the main school building.

Stephen (to Fred) Hello.

Kirsty (to Fred) Hello.

Fred Hello.

Fred sits next to Kirsty.

Stephen I’m Stephen. I’m – responsible, for this polling station. And this is Kirsty, a poll clerk.

Fred What’s that?

Stephen This is – hah, this is, it’s awkward, because . . . there are no rules for what to do really, but there is one big indisputable rule about what not to do, and that’s never ever ask a member of the public who they voted for. So I can’t ask you.

Fred Ah.

Stephen I can’t – ask you. So, here we are. A bit of a pickle. (A moment.)

Fred You know who was on my first . . . first ballot? Churchill. (Laughs.) Woodford, Essex, his local erm . . . his local erm . . .

Stephen That was his constituency.

Fred Yeah, his . . . 21. I was. ‘Winston Churchill’. Saw it. Right there.

Stephen Wow. That’s quite something. I suppose only a very lucky few of us ever get a chance to actually vote for the actual leader of the country.

Kirsty Or unlucky, depending on your . . .

Stephen And that was – what year would that have –?

Fred 1951.

Stephen ‘51, yes of course.

Fred That was a surprise. Turfing him out, after the war. Unbelievable.

Stephen Yeah, that must have been . . . yeah.

Fred Atlee, next. Then he came back, didn’t he? Churchill. Second time. Then Eden after him. Suez. Terrible. Never should have happened . . .

Stephen I see. Disappointed you, did it?

Fred Beautiful wife.

Stephen As a . . . I mean . . . as a Conservative, you were . . .?

Fred Me? Nah. ‘Are you, or have you ever been, a member of the Communist Party!’ Haha.

Stephen Haha. Yes. Have you?

Fred Of course he changed – didn’t he? Churchill, crossed over the erm . . . When you cross the erm, ‘cause he used to be Liberal.

Laura (returns, with a cup of tea for Fred) Here we are, lovely and warm, ish.

Beat as Fred drinks his tea.

Fred Close, then, this one? Here?

Stephen Close?

Fred Always been Labour.

Stephen The seat? Yes, most often.

Fred No, me. Labour. My old man, union man.

Kirsty So you voted (to the box) . . . oh God.

Fred Didn’t think I’d get to vote twice, though. That’s new.

Stephen Yes. Yes, it is. I’m sorry if there’s been any confusion.

Fred Confusion? No. No.

Alan (returns) Someone picked up, one of the numbers. Niece, I think. I have his address, she’s gonna meet him there.

Fred Oi, that’s mine. (Referring to his phone.)

Stephen Are you OK to walk home, sir?

Fred (standing) Might come back again, get another.

Stephen (aware of Alan) Well. Stranger things, and all that.





Part Three

Alan (leading Fred out) Come on then, guvnor. He only lives down the road. I’ll walk you home, how’s that, part of the service.

Fred exits with Alan, waving bye to the staff. Stephen joins Kirsty and Laura at the desk.

Stephen Thanks, Alan. OK, so, at some point – at some point, Kirsty – we need to have a conversation about forcing family members to vote when they wouldn’t normally have done, in a marginal constituency –

Kirsty OK, yep, but –

Stephen But for now we have to deal with the fact that Mr Norris, we’ve discovered, put in an extra (looking around, self aware) – ‘red’ – vote. Not blue. So that when you got your husband to put in an extra red sweet as well, you were in fact adding to, not cancelling out, a red vote, sweet, vote – leaving – I’m not angry, I’m not, it’s just – that leaves two reds that wouldn’t otherwise have been in there. So –

Kirsty So, just hypothetically, if we could cancel out those two reds with two yellows? That would –

Stephen What we need to do, Kirsty, is appreciate that if a discrepancy is discovered in the box, and the box gets removed from the count, and the count gets delayed, the constituency can’t be announced –

Laura Oh, that would be – that would look, really bad if it’s us who delays –

Stephen I’m not concerned with how it looks, Laura,/ I’m concerned with –

Laura (over Stephen) – in the closest election of our life where one seat might, might, literally make a difference between majority, minority, coalition –

Stephen Leading to instability, uncertainty, market wobbles, war, plague, disease, death, yes, thank you, I get the picture, so –

Kirsty Look, there’s no ‘discrepancy’, every ballot is accounted for on the register, and by the way it was Laura who gave him two bloody sweets in the first place.

Stuart Coghlan has arrived at the desk. He appears a little dazed by something.

Kirsty Hello.

Stephen Hello –

Kirsty (taking Stuart’s polling card) Thank you. ‘818’.

Laura (handing him his paper) ‘818’, there you go. (He’s distracted, looking at the posters in the school.) Sir, are you?

Stuart What? Oh, uh . . . thanks.

He goes to the booth.

Kirsty But realistically – nothing is ever, you know, ‘that’ close.

Laura Sometimes. Thurrock was decided by four votes last time. Four.

Simon Featherstone, the school caretaker, arrives, jangling keys.

Simon Alright?

Kirsty Oh. Simon! The mythical caretaker returns!

Simon I’ve just seen the door, what the hell?

Stephen Where were you this morning?! You weren’t here –

Simon I told that lassie, at the council.

Stephen I don’t know anything about that.

Simon My daughter, had to rush her in. Hospital. False alarm in the end; her mother was the same, way back when, to-and-fro like a yoyo. I told the wife’s brother to come and open up.

Stephen Well he didn’t.

Simon Yeah he’s a bit of a chump, truth be told. (Referencing to the corridor.) I dunno how I’m going to close up, later . . .

Stephen Well we have to lock it at 10, new regulations –

Simon You’ll be lucky.

Stephen It’s not that bad is it, the door, let’s – take a look. (To Kirsty and Laura.) Just . . . gimme a . . . and we’ll . . . (He exits with Simon.)

Laura Oh God oh God, I feel terrible.

Kirsty It’s alright, I’ve texted my brother-in-law, he’s not voted yet either –

Laura What, Kirsty, no, please, stop –

Kirsty (a little gasp) Wait. Ohmygod. I’m an idiot. That’s it.

She starts going down the register.

Laura Wait, who are you looking for?

Kirsty Ssh, no one.

She makes a mark next to a name.

Laura Whow, what are you doing?

Kirsty Ssh. Nothing. S’all above board.

Laura Oh no, you can’t do that . . . oh, but you’re doing it.

She writes a number on the corresponding number list – as Simon enters, walking through the space.

Simon Right mess. (Sighs.) Don’t you want chairs?

Kirsty Yes, we do, but there was no one here to open the cupboard this morning, was there.

Simon Oh ay, that’s right. (He exits.)

Kirsty My neighbour, she got called away today, her mum was sick or something, Northampton, so she won’t be able to come and vote – that’s not fair is it?

Laura Well –

Kirsty But she always, she always . . . picks a yellow sweet, she used to be on the council of yellow sweets. She’s got a poster in her window of the local yellow sweet!

Kirsty hops over to the ballot box and drops it in.

Laura (yelps, nervously.)

Kirsty So! That cancels one out; two good deeds with one stone. You’re welcome.

Simon (re-entering with a chain) I hear it’s really buzzing north of the border, you know? Where the balance of power may well lie this time, ey? Of course it makes no difference to me. I can’t have my candidate on the ballot down here and I didn’t even get a vote up there in the big one last year. So what can I do? I’m a political refugee. Am I on there actually? Simon Featherstone?’

Kirsty Er, what’s erm, your address?

Simon Well, here, the school, obviously, I’m the caretaker.

Kirsty You’re on the register, yes. Here.

Simon Right, well let me think if I can be bothered. (Going off with the chain.) This won’t fix it, but it’ll hold for now. Can’t help but think it’s a metaphor for something, ey?

He goes to exit, passing Howard Roberts, an independent candidate, entering cheerily, looking around.

Howard Alright? (At Simon.) Hello, there. Independent candidate, on the ballot.

Simon A-huh. (Exits.)

Howard Howard Roberts, independent candidate, hi, good to see you again Kirsty. Time flies, ey? Another year.

Kirsty Oh. Yes, it’s – ‘Howard’ right, the erm one-way, system, guy.

Stephen returns.

Stephen Oh, Mr Roberts. Hello.

Howard Howard, please. Here to cast my vote. For ‘myself’. As ever.

Stuart is walking through the space with his ballot.

Howard Just straight over there, sir, many thanks.

Stuart Thank you.

Howard Howard Roberts, independent. Against the one-way system round Morrisons.

Stephen Howard –

Howard (pointing at his slogan) ‘One way? No way!’

Stephen Howard, you can’t influence voters in the polling station –

Howard My mistake, take it back.

Stuart drops his ballot paper into the box, nearby.

Kirsty (to Howard) Can I have your polling card please?

Howard Most certainly. Et voila. (Hands his polling card to Kirsty.)

Kirsty processes Howard.

Simon returns.

Simon Right, that chain will work around the handles come 10.

Stuart (To Simon.) You work here? In the school.

Simon No, I’m a mature student, mate, detention.

Stuart D’you know a wee lad called Harry. Harry Coghlan, he’s six.

Simon I don’t know any of their names, mate.

Stuart Little painting, out in the corridor. Just his ha – . . . his hand.

Stuart struggles, and has to turn away . . . a moment in the room, no one knowing what to do. Until:

Howard (to Stephen) ‘Course, it can be difficult for people to park, can’t it, with the one-way system, honestly, I don’t know why it was ever allowed. Well I do, money, of course. As ever. Still, I shall persist. Three elections on the trot now.

Simon Anyone needs me, in my office.

Stuart exits through the front, Simon into the back.

Laura (handing Howard his ballot paper) Here you go.

Howard Thank you, although I’d like to hold off, if I may, just to eke out the – you know. The – ‘thing’.

Stephen (checking his watch) Bit late this year, Howard, aren’t you?

Howard Oh I just thought it might be more interesting, coming at night, new sorts of people. Real people, you know.

I understand that Mr Abudu might also be coming ‘about’ this time. Nice to get some pics outside as an accidental result, with the old fourth estate.

A police officer, Chika Devan, enters.

Chika (to Stephen) Mr Crosswell, is it?

Stephen Yes.

(Laura stands.)

Chika (handing over the ballot paper) The guy who removed this ballot paper from the polling station, I believe you called it in. He was over the road in the pub, like he said.

Alan returns from outside. Howard wanders towards the voting booths. Some noises outside, journalists, questions.

Alan Wonderkid’s here, just having a few pics. I did myself a disservice, it’s paid off, holding back till later. It’s like One Direction out there.

Howard If you’ll forgive me, it’s ‘one direction’ all around the town centre now, courtesy of some poor local planning, Alan.

Alan Oh. Er. ‘Howard’. Right. Hi.

Howard Still got your hand in the game, I see, after all these years.

Stephen (to Chika) Did he put up any struggle, the guy? If he’s planning on coming back, I just have to be aware, for my staff, if he’s been drinking and –

Chika No not really, huffed and puffed a bit. Sounded like he was just settling a bet with his mates, or something. I wouldn’t worry, didn’t sound like he was coming back, they’ve all gone off for a curry. I’d be happy to stick around for the next 30 though, if that’s . . .

Stephen If you wouldn’t mind, that might be –

Chika’s radio makes a noise, some chatter. ‘225 receiving Met Control.’

Chika ‘Scuse me (checking in on her radio) 225 calling – go on.

Kirsty That won’t be necessary, will it Stephen?

Chika (into radio) Yeah, that’s all received. (returning to Stephen) Sorry, I have to check in on a polling station over near Vauxhall, some kids have tried to drop a match near the ballot box.

Kirsty Oh my God (to Laura), see that’s a crisis.

Adeyami Abudu, the Conservative candidate enters, having had photos outside. Alan follows, guiding him.

Adeyami Hello everyone, hi. How are you?

Alan Here he is, man of the moment.

Chika I’ll try to pop back before 10.

Adeyami (to Chika) Oh, hi, thanks for all you’ve done today, your entire – uh, ‘team’, across Lambeth. Really.

Chika Oh, you’re welcome. (She exits.)

Adeyami (to Stephen) Sorry I’ve come so late. My wife would have liked to be here too, but she’s gone to grab 20 minutes at home, don’t blame her. Today’s been . . . But, good turnout? Up, down, on last time, you reckon?

Stephen Hard to tell, to be honest. Hopefully up.

Adeyami and Alan have a quick look – perhaps hoping for the opposite.

Adeyami Yeah, well –

Howard (moving in for a handshake) Mr Abudu, we meet again.

Adeyami (seeing his rosette) Oh, er –

Howard We did the radio debate together in March. The one-way system?

Adeyami Right.

Howard Well, may the best man win. Only joking, I normally only get around 350, 380. If I break 300 this year I’ll be happy, what with the votes being so spread. People say it’s good, don’t they, break up the big party monopolies, but actually for people like me, it’s harder to get heard, you know.

Laura (handing Adeyami his ballot paper) Mr Abudu, it’s a real pleasure.

Adeyami Thank you. Ooh, who to vote for . . .

People laugh politely.

Howard If you need a tip, I have one! Haha.

Slightly less polite laughter.

Adeyami wanders from the desk, looking at his ballot paper.

Howard Take it I’ll see you at the count later, Kirsty? As per. My favourite bit, actually, standing on stage.

With Adeyami by Stephen. Studying his ballot.

Adeyami I’m, um – actually a bit, I dunno. Moved, if that’s not a silly thing to say. Just, seeing my name there. First time.

Stephen Yes I can imagine. Well, actually I can’t, but . . .

Adeyami God, my mum and dad, they’d . . . I don’t know what they’d say. Laugh, probably. Couple of Nigerian teachers, nothing to lose . . .

Stephen . . . I’m sure they’d be very proud.

Simon returns, with three chairs.

Simon Here. Chairs.

Laura Ooh, brilliant, OK.

Howard Let me help.

Under the ensuing, Kirsty and Laura replace their pommel horse with the chairs.

Adeyami I know I won’t. You know. This seat. It was always going to be a bit of an ask. But. It’s a start, right?

Funny, looking at it. I’m just one of . . . (counting) eight names. Equal size, alphabetical order. Forget, don’t you. Nothing stopping you putting a cross against – anyone. It looks so – fragile, here. Like, anything could happen. A revolution. But there never is. Nothing extraordinary ever happens.

Or maybe that’s not true anymore. Maybe this time . . .

Alan Come on then, Adie, tick-tock, (looking at the clock) polls close in 35.

Adeyami goes to the booth to vote.

Howard I might as well exercise the franchise as well, then, ey? Two candidates, together as one.

He takes his ballot from Laura and goes to the booth. Adeyami is away first, putting his paper in the box.

Adeyami There. God speed. See you at mine?

Alan Yeah (with a blue ribbon), I’ll stick around to the end, put the old blue ribbon on the box once it’s sealed –

Adeyami Kiss for good luck. (He kisses the blue ribbon.)

Alan Uh, sure. (Bit weirded out by that.)

Adeyami Bye, everyone, keep up the good work.

Stephen Let me help you with the local scrum.

Alan ‘Once more into the breach’ . . .

Stephen leads Adeyami out, with Alan, passing by –

Simon That’s my mug, by the way. (Exits.)

Margaret Tann, entering out of breath. Kirsty’s face drops.

Margaret Oh, thank God, I wasn’t sure I’d make it.

Kirsty (forced smile) Oh Margaret! Hello.

(Pointedly.) La-ura. This is Margaret. My Next Door Neighbour.

Laura (forced smile) Oh-oh. Hi-i . . .

Kirsty I thought you were in Northampton, with your mum?

Margaret Oh no, she’s fine, just a bit shook up. I’ll go back tomorrow, I just thought, one, didn’t leave the recycling out for collection like an idiot, and two, didn’t get a chance to vote. So – here we are. Oh hell, I don’t have my card thing.

Kirsty That’s OK. I, uh . . . I ‘know where you live’. Ha.

Margaret God, I’m sorry about this, I rushed here from the station and I’m desperate for the loo, you don’t have a little girls’ room, do you?

Kirsty Oh, er, yes, just down that corridor, along there.

Margaret (going) I suppose it actually is the little girls’ room, primary school, ey.

Margaret exits. Stephen enters through the front.

Stephen OK, so –

Kirsty/ Laura (leaping up) Stephen, look / listen / there’s –

Stephen Whoa, what?

Kirsty We’re going to have to talk really fast so listen, look, so my neighbour got called away today, right, to Northampton, or was it Southampton, one of the hampton’s anyway, which meant she couldn’t vote and if she’d had time I know that she would definitely have made me her proxy to vote for her, and also she is a big and I mean big Lib Dem, I don’t mean she’s big I mean like her support for the Lib Dems is big, and so I thought because it would also cancel out one of the two reds that shouldn’t be in the box, I thought I could just cross her name off and vote for her, which is what I did, I voted for her. Honestly, it’s not as bad as it sounds.

Stephen Yes it is.

Kirsty Is it?

Stephen It’s a criminal offence.

Kirsty Yes, but not really.

Stephen Yes, really. It’s conspiracy to fraud.

Kirsty Is it.

Laura And, you missed the teeny but quite important bit about her neighbour turning up and being in the toilet about to come back and vote.

Stephen . . . OK. (Beat. Covers his face with his hands.) OK.

Kirsty Apart from that, which we’ll fix. On the plus side,

that’s one I’ve cancelled out, and I’ve got my brother-in-law coming down to cancel out the other one, so we are peachy.

Stephen Jesus, would –! . . . OK, first things first. Kirsty – number one, please stop voting.

Kirsty I was just trying to help.

Stephen Number two –

Colin Henderson – Kirsty’s brother-in-law – walks in.

Colin Hi, Kirsty.

Kirsty No.

Colin You wanted me to come vote Lib Dem or something –

Kirsty No, go away!

Colin But you said –

Kirsty/ Stephen GO AWAY!

Colin, baffled, turns straight back around and goes away.

Kirsty Well, what are we going to do about Margaret, she doesn’t have a ballot –

Laura Stephen? The ballot paper the police officer brought back? The drunk guy’s? Where is it?

Stephen removes the ballot from his pocket.

It’s accounted for, crossed off the register. The box would still balance with the book.

Kirsty (little gasp) And she eats yellows! She’ll put an extra yellow in the jar, and we’d be all square, that’s perfect –

Stephen No, no, it isn’t perfect, Kirsty.

Laura But if, if we did this, it would all appear all fine. Wouldn’t it. Stephen? And that’s what’s the most – to maintain people’s trust in the whole – the integrity of the –

Margaret re-enters.

Margaret Sorry about that, I’m just never going to pay to use one in a station, it’s the end of the civilised world, that. So. My slip?

Kirsty (sitting, uncertainly) Uh, OK. Yes.

She makes to begin looking down the register.

Oh. Well . . . this is very odd. It seems that there is a line already through your name . . .

Margaret There’s a line through my name? How can that have happened? You wouldn’t have marked my name off, you know me.

Kirsty Yes, I know, I can’t . . . I literally can’t think of a good enough explanation for that. Stephen?

Stephen (beat. Trying to assess the situation.) Erm . . .

Margaret So what’s going on then, how did it happen?

Kirsty I must have just crossed off the wrong name, I’m sorry, long day. Is there anything we can do about that, Stephen?

Stephen Erm . . .

Margaret I mean it matters this year, doesn’t it, it’s a bloody marginal, and I used to be a councillor. It’s bad enough I wasn’t around to help today, I was meant to be a Teller down in Penge.

Kirsty And that’s the Lib Dems, isn’t it –

Stephen Kirsty, you can’t ask a member of the public –

Margaret It doesn’t matter whether it’s Lib Dems or the Monster Raving bloody Loonies, I have a right to vote, Kirsty, now where is it?!

Stephen (galvanising, formal) Could I ask to see some identification, please.

Margaret What? She knows me. Least I thought so, crossing my name off, maybe not –

She begins going through her bag – Stephen uses this opportunity to take the spare ballot paper that Chika returned and place it on the desk in front of Laura, on top of the other ballots.

(With some I.D.) Here.

Stephen Thank you, Mrs Tann. That’s perfect. I, erm . . . I see what’s happened here, my apologies, and that’s no problem. We can issue you with a ballot. Here.

Margaret takes the ballot from Laura and goes to the booth.

Margaret (returning from the booth) What’s this? Got a stain on it. Looks like the ring on a pint glass, I’m not having that. What is this?

Laura Well as I’m sure you’re aware, from your time as a councillor, once a ballot has been issued, it cannot be reissued, so that is now your ballot, I’m afraid, that’s your ballot.

Alan (returning, rubbing his hand) God, they couldn’t bloody get enough, flash, flash, flash. Course, I’m not an idiot, I know why. ‘Cliché Tory’, he ain’t. Bodes well for him next time, though, safer seat.

Margaret Actually, I’m really not happy about this.

Alan What’s the problem?

Kirsty There isn’t a problem.

Howard (stepping out of the booth – indignant) There is a problem, actually.

Kirsty Oh my God. Howard, you . . .? You’ve been in there this whole . . .?

Howard It’s tantamount to fraud, I’m sorry.

The three staff glance at each other – the game is up. Until:

Stephen OK . . . OK . . . Howard –

Howard The tag line under my name. How we all get a tag line? Look at this. Howard Roberts. Independent. See, the punctuation’s wrong, it should be ‘One way’, question mark, ‘No way’, exclamation mark, they’ve put the exclamation and the question mark the wrong sodding way round so it, it’s ‘One Way! No Way?’

Stephen Right.

Margaret Hello?

Howard That’s fraud.

Alan Howard, that isn’t fraud. Personation is fraud, coercion is fraud, stealing a vote is fraud – no one here is going to jail for poor punctuation. Stephen?

Stephen Yes.

Margaret Hello!

Howard But it completely changes the meaning, doesn’t it? ‘One way! No way?’ Like it’s a question. It’s not a question, it’s a statement. ‘One way? No way!’

Stephen Yes no, I do see –

Margaret Excuse me –

Howard It should be ‘One Way? Question. ‘No Way!’ Answer. On this, the inflection goes up at the end, now? Like I’m a flipping Australian. ‘One way! No way?’

Alan I really think it’s fine, Howard.

Howard It loses all of its power, like I’m not firmly against it. Sounds like I’m relatively sanguine about the whole bloody thing, like I’m a hippy stoner or something. ‘One way. No way?’

(to Margaret) Here, how would you pronounce that?

Alan Stephen?

Howard (to Margaret) Read that aloud.

Margaret (reading it) ‘One Way! No way?’

Howard See?

Margaret (taking her ballot paper to the booth) Oh forget it, I’ll just use this.

Claire – a voter with restricted growth – enters.

Claire Hi Stephen.

Stephen Erm. Claire. Hi. How are you?

Howard I want to speak to someone. It’s rotten to its core, this.

Stephen (to Howard) Fine, as a candidate, I suppose we could put you straight through to Anita, if you really –

Howard Yes, I really.

Claire (handing in her card to Kirsty) How’s it gone today?

Stephen Erm . . . Fine, did – how was work, today? Council – survive without me?

Margaret has voted and is leaving.

Margaret I still don’t really understand. Is there someone I can speak to –

Kirsty Yes, I’ll pop round tomorrow.

Margaret I mean an official –

Kirsty I am an official, Margaret, I’ll come round Tomorrow.

Margaret sighs again, and leaves. Claire is heading to the booth.

Stephen Oh, wait, Claire, we have a . . . some assistance – (making to leave)

Howard Stephen? Anita?

Alan Oh, look, just, use my phone. I have her number, for emergencies.

Howard Thanks, Alan, I’m taking this all the way to the top, they’re not going to get away with this.

Stephen exits through the back. Alan on his phone.

Alan It’s going to voicemail.

Howard Give it to me, I’ll leave a message.

(takes it and heads out) Anita. Howard Roberts, Independent. I’m really not happy, you know. What does this sound like to you. ‘One way’, exclamation mark . . . (Exits.)

Alan Oh God, let me try and sort him . . .

Alan exits after him. Stephen returns with a step, placing it in the booth.

Stephen There.

Claire Thanks. Are you – OK? Look a bit . . .

Stephen Yeah, no I’m – fine. It’s actually just nice to see a – friendly face, it’s . . . been a bit of a day.

Claire goes to vote, and then walks towards the ballot box. Stephen Would you like me to –? (Post the ballot.)

Claire No, that’s fine. My civic duty, got to do it myself haven’t I? Even if it’s just symbolic.

She posts her ballot.

Nice shirt. Today. Good choice. I always wondered actually, do you plan ahead, in your laundry cycle, the week before? (To all of them.) For your ‘polling day’ outfits. Smart, but not too smart. No party-political colours. All that.

Stephen Uh, I su-suppose, a bit, maybe. Yeah.

She looks at Kirsty and Laura who try to smile politely . . .

Claire Christ, normally this time of the day, you’re all properly de-mob happy, so close to the finish.

Stephen Sorry . . . it, it has been quite . . .

Claire Yeah, stressful. This year. I bet.

Rumours are rife at the council, still. Anita’s job? If it was an actual democracy, and we all got a say, I know who’d be a shoe in. You deserve it, Stephen.

Stephen . . .

Claire Well. (going) See you tomorrow.

Stephen Yeah. Bye Claire.

She goes. Stephen goes over to the desk.

Laura So . . . so that’s . . . that’s sort of it, isn’t it? Two yellow sweets. To cancel out the two red sweets. All’s equal, in the eyes of the . . . well, not the law –

Stephen No. Not the law.

Kirsty Look, I know, I get it and we can go over the whys and wherefores later but it’s over. Ok, it’s all balanced and done.

Alan enters from outside.

Alan Howard’s still trying to get through, bless him. Right, I know what you all need, the last leg. A nice cup of tea. Don’t worry, I know where it is. I’ll be mum. (Exits, into the back.)

Kirsty Stephen, come on. Only twenty minutes to go.

Stephen I’m just nipping out, Kirsty. Some air . . .

Laura Stephen?

Stephen I’m fine, really, just, I just need a moment . . .

Stephen opens the door as Christine Metcalf arrives with her daughter Lola.

Christine Oh God that smell, they all have it, don’t they. Schools. Cabbage and Dettol. (At them.) Hello, you look like you’ve had a long day.

Kirsty (trying to cover) He-llo. Name and address, erm, please.

Christine (together) Christine Lola Metcalf, 75 Wellington Road.

Lola There’ll be two, we’re the same name and address.

Christine Unimaginative, I know. People used to do that all the time, name their kids after themselves.

Hanni enters. She wears a hijab and looks antsy, joining the queue.

Kirsty Metcalf. There. Ah, there’s only one of you. That address.

Lola Oh. Well, that’s a mistake.

Kirsty You wouldn’t have registered as anything else? Married name, or –?

Lola/Christine No.

Hanni Excuse me, I don’t mean to . . . but is this going to take long?

Christine Why, have you somewhere more important to be?

Kirsty We won’t be a second, madam.

Hanni I’ve got my card.

Christine Oh a card, I didn’t realise that made you more important – Lola, let this woman through, she’s got a card.

Lola Mum. (To her.) I’m sorry.

Christine Don’t apologise on my behalf. (To Hanni.) I’m sorry. I get that you’re in a rush. We won’t be a second.

Hanni OK.

Christine I’m just out of hospital, my knee, I’m on some new pills.

Lola She doesn’t need to know that, Mum.

Christine (to Kirsty) That’s alright, isn’t it? Voting on medication? I’m not operating heavy machinery or anything –

Kirsty That’s fine, only I can still only see one name.

Laura Kirsty?

Kirsty What, Laura?

Laura (pointing to the register) It’s just I’ve just seen a ‘P’, there, by the name.

Christine ‘P’, what does that mean?

Kirsty (looking – laughing, embarrassed) Oh. Right, sorry; we had a little – thing, before you came in; crisis, it’s sent us all a bit – distracted – ‘p’ yes, ‘p’ means proxy. You – whichever one of you this is – you were registered for a proxy vote.

Christine Proxy.

Kirsty It means someone voting on your behalf –

Christine Thank you, yes, I know that – oh, well that settles it then; it’s mine.

Lola Oh, yeah, we signed my mother up for that, when she went in for an operation. We thought she might still be in today.

Christine I didn’t want to do the postal thing; you hear stories. That’s alright though, isn’t it? That I’ve come in myself?

Kirsty Yes that’s fine, the person can still come in on the day.

Christine Well what about Lola, she should still have one.

Kirsty Lola? I thought you said Christine –

Christine Oh we’ve always just called her that, saves confusion. Though not today, apparently.

Stephen has re-entered.

Kirsty Stephen, these ladies, they have the same name, right, mother and daughter, but only one of them is listed on the register.

Stephen Erm . . . And, and you definitely both registered? Individually?

Christine Yes definitely, we always do.

Stephen I could ring the office to check the database, after 9.30pm, we probably won’t get through, but let me, erm, try (leaving, with his phone).

Laura (handing Christine her ballot paper) Here’s your paper, if you’d like to step over to the booth.

Christine (taking it) Shall I do mine now?

Lola Can’t you wait? For mine?

Christine (to Hanni) Go on then, it’s all yours.

Laura You’re welcome to wait.

Hanni Thank you. I didn’t mean to – you know. (Hands in her card.)

Lola (sitting) I’ve got Mars ice creams in here, the kids, they’ll be melting.

Stephen (returning, on his phone) No, not getting through at the moment. (To Christine.) Do you want me to keep trying?

Lola Is that alright?

Christine You don’t have to keep answering for me, Lola, I looked after enough patients myself for forty years.

Lola Jesus, bloody – inpatient, that’s what you are.

Christine Oh that’s good, how long have you been thinking of that one?

Hanni goes to the booth. Alan enters with a tray of teas.

Alan Tea, soldiers, before we go over the top, for the final push. It’s the British way.

Stephen (at the clock) Only 18 minutes to go . . .

END OF PART III:

Theatre Only 3

Stephen dials again on his phone, and exits.

Howard has re-entered, on the phone. He stands near Alan.

Howard . . . so you can either call me back on this number –

Kirsty Ooh, Howard, sorry, phone.

Howard Just leaving a message, not a conversation, and I do have certain rights as an Observer, Kirsty, to be in touch with election officials –

Kirsty Oh Christ, just leave the message.

Howard Apologies Anita, as I was saying, you can either reach me on this number, which is Alan’s phone, and I’ve just given you mine, or if you haven’t got a pen you can call my home phone number and on the answer machine if you press one, it actually directs you straight to this phone. Not this phone sorry, just to say again, this is Alan’s phone, so that number on your screen now, that’s not mine –

Alan Howard, I think she’ll get it.

Howard – but it will direct you through to my phone, which I have with me on vibrate. Alright Anita, I look forward to speaking to you, hopefully before 10pm. Not much we can do after that, is there. OK bye, bye. (He hangs up.)

Alan Honestly Howard, I really don’t think it will have affected your numbers.

Howard (whispering, to Alan) I think it was me. Who cocked up the punctuation, on the form.

Lola (to Kirsty) Daft question, but there’s not a fridge anywhere, is there, only I have ice creams?

Voter 8 enters and crosses to the issuing desk.

Kirsty Not that’s available for use, I’m afraid.

Howard It was the wrong way round on some A4 posters I took to the printers. I had a bit of a go at them, too.

Alan Well. Maybe just let it go, then? Ey?

Christine We could have them.

Lola No.

Alan Tea?

Howard (gives him tea) Thanks, Alan.

I wonder if I’ve got that thing, where people struggle with words.

Alan Dyslexia.

Howard No that’s where you’re always falling over things, isn’t it?

Alan I think that’s dyspraxia.

Howard Dysmorphia, that’s it.

Alan Howard, it’s dyslexia.

Howard We didn’t half have some slanging matches in those public forums over the years.

Alan I’m not going to lie, Howard, I used to dread Monday night planning meetings.

Howard Well I’ll say this. You make a decent cup of tea, Alan.

Alan Thank you, Howard.

Howard I think people are just quite happy to have a nice, easy drive to a supermarket.

Alan Not that happy, clearly. It’s closing. The supermarket. Biscuit?

Howard stares at Alan. Voter 8 votes and leaves.





Part Four

The polling station, 9.45pm.

Lola with Christine. Alan and Howard loitering. Hanni comes out of the booth and back to the desk, interrupting Kirsty and Laura.

Hanni Hello, hi, I’m sorry, I’ve – I made a mistake, I’ve put a cross next to the wrong one (she rips the ballot paper in half).

Kirsty Ok, you . . .

Hanni Do you only get one go?

Kirsty Erm, no, you – but you’ll have to use a special ballot paper, wait.

Kirsty gets a tendered ballot paper from the sundries table.

Howard (eating a biscuit and sipping his tea, with Alan) Sometimes, I wonder. Imagine if I won. Imagine if my campaign worked. I don’t know what I’d do, then.

Kirsty (to Hanni) You’ll have to bring that back to us when you’re done.

Howard I’ve got absolutely no idea . . .

Hanni (taking her new paper) Thanks. Try and get it right this time. (Goes back.)

Howard One good thing about a one-way system I suppose, is that it never stops. It just goes round and round. You can stay on it forever. Like the yellow brick road.

Alan (beat) The yellow brick road isn’t a one-way system.

Howard Nothing at the end of it though, is there?

Alan Yeah. It, it leads to Oz. That . . . that’s the whole point.

Howard Oh. I’ve never watched it. (He drops his biscuit into his tea.)

Stephen enters, hanging up the phone. Christine and Lola stand as he approaches.

Stephen Well the good news is someone at the local office picked up, but the bad news is you’re not on the database, so I’m sorry, there’s not a lot we can do.

Voter 9 enters and crosses to the issuing desk. Stephen exits.

Christine (to Lola) Oh look, let me just vote and we’ll kick up a stink tomorrow.

Lola Yeah, so OK look . . . I think I might have forgotten. I think I might have forgotten to register me after I did you on the poxy proxy thing.

Christine And you were blaming them?! Lola.

Lola If you recall, mother, it was –

Voter 9 takes ballot and heads to booth #2.

Christine ‘Mother’, oh Christ, she’s calling me ‘mother’, which means it’s bound to be my fault.

Lola It was a pretty busy time, that’s all, running you back and forth –

Christine And I’m really grateful. You know that. Anyway, that clears that up.

Christine moves towards the booth and Lola follows.

Lola Hang on – no, that doesn’t clear anything up, can we just talk about this?

Stephen Ladies, if you’re going to debate this, can I ask you to move away from the other voters. (Ushering them away from the voting booths.) Thank you . . . Thank you . . . Thank you.

Stephen takes Christine and Lola to sit down. Alia returns with two more Voters – Voter 10 and Terri Fletcher.

Stephen I want to start getting the accounts together. That box will be in the town hall by 11.

Alia Me again!

Stephen (warning) Alia . . . (Exits.)

Kirsty (at her watch) Oh Alia, for God’s –! Cutting it fine, aren’t you?

Terri Terri Fletcher (handing in her card. Back at Alia) Can’t drop me off first can you, I don’t like leaving the kids?

Voter 9 votes and exits.

Alia We’ll go in order of closest, it won’t take long.

Terri You knocked on my door, remember. I don’t know what makes you think I’m voting for your lot, neither.

Alia Because you said!

Terri Well people say a lot things, don’t they. Like politicians.

Voter 10 is processed.

Lola (to Christine) So? Who gets the vote then?

Christine (beat) Which vote?

Lola (pointing to the ballot paper in Christine’s hand) That vote. Our vote.

Christine ‘Our vote’? This is my vote. You registered it for me.

Lola I registered this for Christine Metcalf.

Christine Yes, hello, speaking.

Laura (taking the tendered ballot from Hanni) Ah, thank you.

Terri is heading to the ballot box with the slip in her hand. She sees Hanni at the issuing desk.

Terri Special treatment . . .

(Voter 10 heads towards ballot box and drops ballot in box.)

Hanni (to Terri) May I help you with something?

Terri ‘May you help me?’ No, love. No, this is me helping myself. (Drops her ballot paper.) This is normal people, helping themselves.

Hanni Sorry?

Terri What, can’t you understand? Chop yer hand off for doing this in your country, don’t they?

Kirsty What?

Terri (To Kirsty.) Can I help you?

Christine Actually, I don’t mean to butt in, but it’s ‘may’ I help you, she got it right, her English seems impeccable to me.

Lola Mum.

Alia (To Terri.) Alright, home time, let’s go.

Alia exits with Terri and Voter 10.

Laura (To Hanni.) It’s totally fine if you want to hang on here, for a minute.

Hanni nods, gratefully, and sits down next to Christine and Lola.

Kirsty (over to Lola and Christine) Ladies, if you’re going to vote then would you mind?

Lola Yes, one minute –

Hanni (to Christine) I appreciated that, thank you.

Alastair Swift has returned, having had a couple more drinks. He crosses to the desk.

Alastair Yeah, so I was, I was in earlier.

Stephen reenters.

Laura . . . Stephen?

Alastair Copper said she bought back my thing, my, erm, my vote.

Stephen Ok, sir. If you’ll just sit here for a moment, I’ll get my colleagues to check the paperwork. Laura? Kirsty?

Alastair sits on the bench. Laura and Kirsty busy themselves ‘looking for the ballot’.

Christine Let’s just call this what it is; you forgot to register because you didn’t care enough; if you’d cared enough you wouldn’t have forgotten; end of.

Lola I didn’t used to care. I do now. Now that I can’t. Suddenly I actually really care.

Christine Oh well that’s petty.

Lola It’s not petty.

Alastair (joining the conversation) What’s petty?

Stephen No, sir –?

Christine She wants my vote.

Alastair (gasps.)

Lola Fine, I’ve got a reason why I should have it. I only forgot to register myself because I was run ragged looking after you.

Christine Nice try. It’s not like I turned up begging on your doorstep, it’s the other way round. You and the kids are with me.

Alastair Boom. (To Lola.) Now, your go.

Voter 11 enters and gets processed.

Lola We’re paying rent, aren’t we?

Alastai Oop, one-all.

Christine I know you are! And I love having you. But you’re not getting my vote.

Lola Do you think I’ll ever be able to afford your big house? Have your pension. That there’ll be enough money for me to get rebuilt from scratch on the NHS, whatever the party? Maybe that’s why I want a vote.

Alastair She’s right, it’s your lot, you’ve screwed us, big time.

Simon enters, jangling his keys.

Simon Alright?

Stephen OK, sir, I think you’ve had too much to drink –

Alastair No, not too much, I’m just having a little sit down. (He sits down on the stack of small chairs.)

Christine He’s fine, not doing any harm.

Stephen Look, Ladies –

Lola We’re in a stalemate, I’m afraid.

Stephen You can’t debate in here.

Simon (with the tea tray) Who brought this out? (Sighs. Gathers it up and exits.)

Christine (to Lola) Wait a minute. You were trying to persuade me not to come, today. You knew you’d forgotten to register . . .

Voter 11 posts ballot and exits.

Lola I was just worried you weren’t up to coming in.

Christine Excuse me, who’s the nurse and who’s the management?

Lola Retired nurse, and hospitals need management.

Laura Stephen . . .

Alastair Have you found it? My thing. The – paper.

Stephen Er . . . one second. Just, sit there – (moving back to the desk.)

Simon (returning) She’s had it. She’s had it, it’s a boy. My first grandchild.

Christine A grandchild? Congratulations!

Lola (her phone is ringing) God, this is my kids. (Going.) Just wait one second. Don’t do anything. (She exits.)

Laura Can’t we just – get him to leave?

Howard with Simon.

Howard Born on the day of the election. That’s something. History. Isn’t it?

Simon Is it? . . . Yeah. S’pose.

Alan (to Howard with his phone) Howard, text from Anita, she says she’s stuck in traffic and it might be after 10 that she gets here.

Howard Oh! The one-way system does thwart me again . . . Irony after irony.

Alastair (standing) Look, I just want my paper, where’s my paper?

Kirsty We . . . we don’t have it. You took it.

Alastair The copper brought it back, she said.

Kirsty There’s no record of that.

Alastair Oh, what? I don’t believe this, what?!

Alan Is there a problem?

Alastair They’re not giving me my vote.

Kirsty We don’t have his vote, he took his vote.

Alastair You’re . . . you’re lying. You’re a liar.

Alan Now look, that’s a bit strong, so just –

Alastair She’s a liar. It’s here. I’m gonna phone that police woman, person.

(With his phone.) Phone’s dead, that’s, shit . . .

Christine (to Alastair) Maybe you should go and sort that out, then. You can stay, if you want, you’re not bothering me, but – maybe that would be best.

Alastair Alright. (Gives Christine his phone.) Wait here. I’m not – this isn’t done. Wait. (He takes his phone back and exits.)

Kirsty It’s nearly 10, and we have to lock the door at 10, he won’t come back in, he’s –

Stephen And if he does . . .?

Alan A Presiding Officer can demand a person be arrested Stephen, if you need that in your back pocket.

Lola coming back.

Lola Sorry, that was Thomas.

Alan (looking at the clock – with his ribbon) Here we are then, Stephen, almost time to seal up that bad boy. Howard? You got a ribbon, sealing the box with me?

Howard Of course (removing his ribbon. Beat.) OH MY GOD I HAVEN’T EVEN VOTED YET!

Howard begins searching for his paper.

Lola Look. You’re right. It’s technically you on the list. So go on. Vote.

Simon You know what, I’ll have my vote as well. (At the desk.)

Christine . . . This is a trick, isn’t it? You’re buying yourself some currency; get to use this against me for years now; ‘remember when . . .’.

Lola No. It’s just . . . (more teasing) well, this could be your last election, couldn’t it. So, enjoy.

Christine Please, I’ve just had a full M.O.T, I’m like the tin man after they oiled him. Look, look at this (she does a few leg twists and turns with her hip –wiggling limbs).

Simon (laughing, joining in a bit) Hah, yeah, why not, let’s celebrate.

Lola Mum, Jesus . . . are you high? How many painkillers did you take?

Christine Oh you’re such a – ‘suit’.

Lola Hospitals need suits, how many?

Simon (taking his ballot paper from the desk) Imagine, in 18 years, he’ll be standing here, won’t he. His first vote.

Christine It’s oxycodone, 5 to 15 miligrams, every 4 to 6 hours, it’s fine. (Looking at Simon, who is looking at his ballot paper.)

And anyway. I’ve decided I’m giving my vote to you.

Kirsty Finally, come on then –

Christine (with the paper) It’s what we’re meant to do, isn’t it. Pass it on.

Alan 6 minutes to go, guys.

Howard (quietly, to Kirsty) Kirsty, I’m sorry, but I, I can’t find my ballot paper.

Chika enters.

Chika Hello again. Back, as promised.

Simon I’m a granddad.

Chika Awh. Ok.

Simon posts his vote and starts tidying up.

Lola (taking the ballot) I don’t know what to say, Mum. I don’t even know who I’m going to vote for?

Christine What do you mean?

Lola Well. It’s complicated, isn’t it?

Christine (snatching it back) Oh sod that, there’s no way I’m giving it you now.

Lola Mum! It’s not like football, anymore, you don’t stick with the same side all your life.

Christine Oh, you’re so fickle. Alastair comes back in with Tilde.

Alastair Right, here’s a member of the press – Swedish, admittedly, but . . .

Stephen No, no. There’s no press, I told you –

Tilde This man –

Stephen I’ve already told you. Listen!

Tilde This man says you are denying him the vote.

Alastair (Seeing Chika.) Oi, it’s you! You’re the copper, you took my paper. They’re saying they haven’t got it.

Tilde This is a very big story.

Chika No, they do. You do, don’t you, sir?

Alastair I knew it, I knew it!

Chika Sir, you’ve had a couple too many, and I’d like you to calm down.

Alastair Me? It’s them! (Stumbling.)

Chika Sir, I’m going to need you to calm down.

Alastair I’m calm, I’m calm.

Howard I can’t find my paper.

Chika (to Stephen) Sir, maybe it would help if you could give this man his ballot paper?

Alastair Yeah, yes.

Stephen I . . . I don’t . . .

Kirsty (an idea) He spoilt it!

Alastair What?

Laura He –?

Kirsty Right, Stephen? There was beer, there were these stains, all over it. It was spoilt, it can’t be used.

Alastair Awh wait, this is – nah, this is BULLSHIT! It’s –

Howard (to Stephen) Stephen, I’m sorry to bother you, but can I have another ballot paper –

Stephen (turning, and snapping, a little) NO! HOWARD! YOU CAN’T!

A moment in the room.

I already gave you one. (To Alastair.) And you one! And a thousand other people today! (At the sundries table.) And then there are all these – these ones that nobody used, that’ll all get thrown away! (to Lola) Maybe if you had cared enough to actually register, madam (to Alastair), maybe if you’d respected the ballot enough to not walk out with it, sir! (To Tilde) Maybe if you just left when I asked you to! Maybe if everyone treated it a bit more carefully, if you realised how fragile it was! Maybe if everyone didn’t just step on it and then go ‘oh look, it’s broken, let’s throw it away’.

Maybe that. Maybe that. Ey?

Christine (taking out some pills) I know what you need, here.

Alastair OK, alright, mate, I just . . . Jesus, I didn’t mean to . . .

Tilde I apologise, I didn’t mean to . . . I’ll go.

Alastair Erm, OK, I’ll . . . I’m gonna . . .

He follows, stumbling after Tilde as she leaves.

Stephen . . . Laura, I need you to be the marker that waits outside for any queues, I’ll take your place at the desk.

Laura Right, but –

Stephen Just go, please, would you.

Laura heads towards the door.

Howard Maybe it’s outside, Alan, do I have time?

Laura turns back into the room followed by Alastair as he enters.

Stephen Laura, I just told you –

Laura But what about him?!

Alastair No, no, no, I wanted to say – I’m sorry. You were right, my bad. I was disrespectful, you deserve respect. All of you. For what you do.

Chika Alright, maybe we should be getting you out of here, sir.

Alastair No, I’m saying I’m sorry, you’re right. I don’t deserve it. My vote.

Stephen (rubbing his head) Oh, God, no, that, that’s – Alastair That’s all I’m saying, I’m done –

Alastair walks back and stumbles over. A reaction, in the room. Chika and Alan helping him.

Laura Right, enough! Stephen, this man is intimidating other voters and you have the right to have him arrested, right? As the Presiding Officer.

Fred enters and makes his way to Stephen at the issuing desk.

Kirsty Yes, he can be removed. Tell her. (To Chika.) Miss –

Chika (to Alastair, helping him) Come on, up you get sir.

Alastair No, no, no, I was just – I’m fine.

Howard (by the door) I don’t know what to do.

Kirsty (to Stephen and Laura) Stephen, it’ll be fine, we’re good, it’s nearly –

Stephen This . . . this isn’t –

Fred taps Stephen on the shoulder.

Fred Oi –

Stephen Sir, please, no more . . .

Fred Look (he shows him a ballot paper – the second one he was meant to have posted. He winks at Stephen and gives it to him).

Stephen You didn’t post it. You didn’t vote twice.

Fred shakes his head. Takes out some lottery tickets.

Fred My mistake. Posted one of these instead . . .

Stephen Lottery ticket?

Fred Might be the winning one. Isn’t that funny?

Stephen . . . hilarious, yes. Why did you bring it back?

Fred (waving it) Cause it’s valuable. Ey?

Howard (seeing) Is that a spare?! Please, can I have it, I need it?

Christine (to Stephen) She’ll have it if you don’t want it, we need a spare.

Howard But it’s got my name on it, I mean it’s actually got it on it.

Stephen No, it isn’t a spare. (To Alastair.) Sir? You’re a drunk and you’re a bit of a prick but you still deserve this, here.

Alastair (taking it) That’s not mine.

Stephen No, it’s not. We . . . I gave yours to someone else.

Alan You what?

Stephen I’m very sorry. I – I let people down, you down.

Kirsty Stephen, don’t.

Stephen (to Kirsty) It has to mean something . . . right? It has to matter.

The chimes of Big Ben begin on the radio.

Christine It’s 10 o’clock. Oh I’ve had enough.

Christine votes in the booth.

Lola Mum?!

Christine It really is very simple. You – all of you – fucking about. When it’s so, bloody, simple. Watch.

She makes her way to the ballot box. As does Stephen, guarding it.

Stephen Wait. The box has been compromised. A fraud has been committed.

Alan Stephen?!

Christine Look, I Am Using This Vote, so I warn you, if it’s not going in that box then I’ll be shoving it somewhere. Got it?

Stephen This box will have to be removed from the count.

Laura That’ll delay the result!

Stephen Well it’ll delay the result, then.

Chika Can someone just explain to me what’s been going on here?

The first bong on the radio.

Howard First bong! I still have to vote! I just . . . (panicking, getting upset, searching) can’t find my . . .

Second bong.

Alan Alright, I’m getting some order in here, Jesus. Hands up if you’re in here to vote?

Third bong.

Lola I am. I’m owed one.

Alan Right.

Fred Me too.

Stephen/ Kirsty/ Laura/ Alan No!

Fourth bong.

Chika Mr Crosswell, I need you to tell me what’s happened here.

Stephen Yes, of course.

Fifth bong.

Kirsty Stephen, wait, it was me too! I did it too. I mean we all did, right, Laura?

Sixth bong.

Laura . . . I . . . I don’t know what to do . . .

Seventh bong.

Howard I need somebody to help me. It’s all I have.

Eighth bong.

Chika stands in front of the box, guarding it, and radioing in.

Chika Right, everyone remain where you are, and stay away from the box.

Ninth bong.

Kirsty Stephen?

Stephen Ssh! Wait. Let me just . . . hear it. Before I go . . .

Tenth bong . . .

An announcement on the radio, as the lights begin to fade . . . ‘The news, at 10 o’clock. We have just received the Exit Poll undertaken for today’s General Election, and the numbers are as follows . . .’

Blackout.





Monster Raving Loony

‘Whatever is funny is subversive. Every joke is a custard pie’ George Orwell

‘There is no such thing as a joke’

Sigmund Freud





Monster Raving Loony was first performed at Theatre Royal Plymouth in a production with Soho Theatre, London, on 6 February 2016 with the following cast and creatives:

David Sutch Samuel James

The Band Joseph Alessi

Camilla Beeput

Joanna Brookes

Jack Brown



Director Simon Stokes

Guest Director Cal McCrystal

Set & Costume Designer Bob Bailey

Composer/MD Tom Attwood

Lighting Designer Chahine Yavroyan

Sound Designer Gregory Clarke

Video and Projection Designer Duncan McLean





Characters

David Sutch, aka Screaming Lord Sutch, 3rd Earl of Harrow.

The remaining parts are played by members of The Band: (Music Hall). Max Miller – Champagne Charlie

(The Beano) Lord Snooty

(Pantomime) Dame Annie

(Bedroom Farce) Pauline – Mrs Nichols – American Pilot – Mr Nichols

(Pete and Dud) Peter Cook – Dudley Moore

(The Goon Show) Greenslade – Bluebottle – Eccles – Minnie – Henry

(Hancock’s Half Hour) Returning Officer

(Carry On) Barbara Windsor – Kenneth Williams – Brian Blessed

(Frost Report) John Cleese – Ronnie Barker

(Till Death Us Do Part) Alf Garnett – Else – Rita

(Monty Python). Callaghan – Wilson – Heath

(The Young Ones) Mayall – Edmonson – Planer

(Morecambe and Wise) Wise

(Monty Python) Cleese – Jones

(Steptoe and Son) Albert

(Some Mother’s Do ‘Ave ‘Em) Interviewer

(Hi-de-Hi) Ruth Maddoc – Sue Pollard – Simon Cadell

(Yes Minister) Minister – Civil Servant

(Allo Allo) Constable – Michelle – Von Kinkerhoffen

(Blackadder) Baldrick – Percy – Queenie – Melchett

(Just a Minute) Nicholas Parsons – Julian Cleary – Sandi Toksvig

(Only Fools & Horses) Rodney – Boycie – Marlene

(Absolutely Fabulous) Patsy – Sapphie

(Alan Partridge) Lynn





Part One

The South Harrow Social Club. May, 1997.

Around the room are framed black-and-white images of the acts that have visited on the circuit. Comedians and musicians; Tommy Cooper, Victoria Wood, Gerry and the Pacemakers, the Dave Clark Five.

There is perhaps a raised stage where the acts come to perform. Sparkly drapes that have seen better days. Other Working Men’s paraphernalia – a dartboard; a television on a bracket in one corner, playing a montage of classic England ‘World Cup Moments’ (most of them painful).

All audience members should have been given club items upon entry – a raffle ticket, say, and a bingo card. Party bags and party hats. A Landlady and her ‘staff’ could be handing out small sandwiches and cups of tea, gossiping during the pre-show.

A Band tuning instruments on stage.

Landlady Hello, can you hear me? Hi. Er, good evening, welcome to the South Harrow Social Club. Please give it up for our act tonight – The Savages!

Band Member Hullo. Pleasure to be back. ‘Home turf’.

I, uh . . . I’m afraid this evening we are without our leading man. This being the day it is, and as many of you’ll know, him doing what he does . . . But, we’ll play on, spirit of the blitz. Workers’ solidarity. Uh, and we need the money.

Ey, and I hope you’ve been out, exercising your democratic right. Too late now if not, serves you right. Anyway. Enough of that. A one, two –

David Sutch – a big rosette, top hat, leopard-print jacket – enters. Looking around.

One by one, the Band notice, and stop playing. Looking at him, confused. He’s handed the mic.

Sutch takes it. And goes to speak . . . but can’t think of anything to say. Beat. The Band kick into the song again, the opening instrumental.

Sutch (singing). ‘The old rocker wore his hair too long. Wore his trouser cuffs too tight.

Unfashionable to the end – drank his ale too light. Death’s head belt buckle – yesterday’s dreams.

The transport caf’ prophet of doom. Ringing no charge in his double-sewn seams. In his post-war-babe gloom . . .

Now he’s too old to rock ‘n’ roll; Too young to die . . .

Yes he’s toooooo old to to rock and roll, but he’s . . .

The squeal from the amp, a shock of electricity, and the power cuts out.

The TV fuzzes back to life, news footage of election night, May 1997. A Labour landslide.

With another flicker, and distorted feedback from the amps in the darkness, the footage begins to wind back, through the years.

Tony Blair, the New Labour leader, promising ‘We will build – a new Britain’. Through post-war governments, to the Blitz, to –

Clement Attlee, with his Labour Landslide, a generation earlier. ‘We will build . . . Jerusalem, in England’s green and pleasant Land.’

Max Miller on screen.

‘Thanks very much, I expected more, but I’m satisfied. Haha! Now here’s a funny thing.’

In our own semi-darkness, one of the Band Members appears, transforming into Max Miller, stepping forward almost like a ghost, haunting the place.

Sutch watches . . .

Max Miller ‘Now then, do you want jokes from the white book or the blue book? Blue? I knew it, looking at yer. You’ll get me in trouble with the Lord Chamberlain, that’s right. Well what about this one then, ey? I remember this one time, I was walking along this narrow mountain pass – so narrow that nobody else could pass you, when I saw a beautiful blonde walking towards me. A beautiful blonde with not a stitch on her, yes, not a stitch on, lady. Cor blimey, I didn’t know whether to toss myself off or block her passage.

Now, don’t laugh too loud alright, cause the management’ll hear and they’ll know we’re being rude.’

The TV flickers to something else.

The old ‘Lion Comiques’ – entertainers dressing up as rich people to poke fun.

Another Band Member appears as Champagne Charlie, top hat and tails, monocle, grotesque expressions, against the ethereal sound of his famous song.

Champagne Charlie (singing) ‘For Champagne Charlie is me name, Champagne drinking is my game

There’s no drink as good as fizz fizz fizz I’ll drink every drop there is, is, is.’

Sutch watches . . .

The TV flickers again – and we hear the lines (what we’ll later learn to be, ‘The Great Dictator’).

‘You must speak.’

‘You must. It is our only hope.’

Sutch looks out, wondering what to say.

The TV flickers again – music, and the title card for ‘The Tramp’ (the 1915 silent movie).

Charlie Chaplin appears on screen as – like Champagne Charlie before him – a ‘vagrant’ aspiring to be a gentleman. Bowler hat and cane. Funny work.

Sutch begins to imitate him. His silent clowning, and his walk, growing in confidence.

Lord Snooty in his elite school uniform comes face to face with Sutch, here 11 years old, who enters and stands next to Sutch without them noticing each other at first.

Lord Snooty places his violin down, and removes The Beano from his pocket to read.

THE BEANO

Harrow, early 1950s.

Snooty Oh. Hello.

Sutch (sees him, surprised.)

Snooty Can you talk? Lord Snooty, a pleasure.

Sutch (finding his voice) . . . I – . . . I’m David. David Sutch. How’s it going me old cocker, alright?

Snooty Oh gosh, frightfully sorry, I don’t speak – wherever it is you’re from.

Throughout, Sutch is partially distracted, imitating and practising his ‘Tramp’.

Sutch Me, I’m from just down the road (pointing one way).

Snooty Really, well so am I (pointing the other).

Sutch You’re from Harrow? Nah! Why you dressed like that, then?

Snooty This is my uniform. ‘The Harrow School.’

Sutch Mine’s Percy Road. What’s that?

Snooty (holding up an instrument case) This?

Sutch Yeah.

Snooty It’s my violin.

Sutch A violin?! Wow awh brilliant, can I have go?

Snooty Oh, I . . . it’s actually quite delicate, I’m afraid, sort of an heirloom. Passed down to me, you know, terrorifically fragile. My father says ‘There are those born to listen, and those born to play . . .’.

Sutch My father doesn’t say anything, he died.

Snooty Oh . . . Well. Circulus Vitiosus.

Sutch What’s that, German?

Snooty Latin.

Sutch What country’s that, then?

Snooty It – isn’t a country, it’s a language.

Sutch Oh, where’s it spoken?

Snooty Erm. The past.

Sutch Oh.

Snooty Your school doesn’t have Latin?

Sutch Our school don’t have a roof. Bloody Germans.

Snooty What about your school motto, that must be Latin. What’s the phrase your Headmaster repeats at Assembly all the time?

Sutch ‘If I’ve told you once, David Sutch, I’ve told you a THOUSAND TIMES! –’

Snooty Ours is Stret Fortuna Dormus. ‘Let the fortune of the house, stand.’

Sutch I don’t know why I weren’t allowed to go to your school, it’s right by my house. I think my teachers have given up on me. I just muck about mostly.

Snooty Muck about? Gosh, that sounds fun . . .

Sutch I do impressions.

Snooty Impressions? You mean like sketches of things, etchings?

Sutch Pfff, no! I mean like being and acting like, I don’t know, Mr Hickinbottom, I do a good one of him, behind his back. (‘Posh, nasal voice’). ‘I say, turn to this, and multiply that, find this on the map, remember that came after that’.

Snooty I must say that’s terribly funny without even knowing the chap. I’m sure I wouldn’t dare. Some of the greatest Prime Ministers attended Harrow, you know, though. Stanley Baldwin, Lord Palmerston, Winston Churchill.

Sutch I saw Winston Churchill once!

Snooty No!

Sutch Yeah.

Snooty No!

Sutch Yeah! Honest to God, on Kilburn High Road, he was looking at the rubble and the holes where we live.

Snooty Did you meet him?

Sutch Nah, but he looked at me, least I think he did. Scouts honour. (As Winston Churchill.) ‘We must fight them for their peaches.’

Snooty (laughs) You really are very funny, you know.

Sutch Really. Am I? Awh. Well. Maybe I’ll be Prime Minister one day, then.

Snooty Oh, I shouldn’t think so. It isn’t something one just decides.

Sutch Oh that’s where you’re wrong, cause we won the war, see? And they’re saying that gives us a ‘head start’ over everyone else. A chance to rebuild everything, from the ground up, a ‘clean slate’. Even my mum says she feels younger these days. Like anything is possible. We just need to have ‘a good old clear out, and start again’.

Snooty Well. My father says the most important thing is – tradition. (Looks at the violin in his hand.)

Sutch I’m gonna find my own instrument. There’s loads o’ second-hand stuff you find lying around these days. I can form my own orchestra, or troupe, or band!

Snooty Well if it were up to me. But, like I say. It’s about those who listen, those who play . . . (Exits.)

Sutch No it isn’t . . . oh no it isn’t!

An echo, as the lights flicker . . . ‘Oh yes it is!’

PANTOMIME

Annie Sutch (Dame Trot from ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’) hops on to cymbals crashing.

Annie Hello boys and girls!

Oh you can do better than that, I said HELLO BOYS AND GIRLS!

Ye-es, that’s better. How are you all then, enjoying yourselves at the back there? Why, what you doing?

So what do you think of my new dress, then, do you like it? Yes? Everything’s made by me, oh yes. Apart from my bra of course. Yes, I call this my American bra.

Yes, one yank and it’s off.

Course we had a lot of American soldiers just down the road during the war. Oh yes.

She makes lots of hot under the collar motions, wafting herself with a bit of paper.

What’s this – oh, a royal proclamation from the King! That’s King Rat-Lee. Clement Rat-lee to his friends, yes. Don’t look at me, I didn’t write it.

‘The Beveridge Report’, did you get one of these? Yes, a bit of politics coming your way, love, strap yourself in.

Let’s have a look. ‘Our plan for a New Britain.’ Ooooh I say. How to slay the five ‘evil giants’ – get a load of this. The five giants are, ‘Squalor, Ignorance, Want, Idleness, and Disease’. They sound more like Snow White’s dwarves after a night out, don’t they?

Beveridge Report, pff, no there’s only one ‘Beveridge’ I like. A nice stiff one. And there’s not been much to ‘Report’ on that front lately, I can tell you.

No cause I’m afraid to say, boys and girls that I am . . . very lonely at the moment. (Waits for the aarhs.) Lonelier that that. (Waits for the bigger aarhs.)

Yes, it’s just been me and my boy David since my dear old husband William died in the war. Mm. Came off his bike down the High Street. He was off to his Warden Station, he was. He hit a pothole and that was it. Oh he was a clumsy one, my husband, I tell you something, if there was a hole to be found, my Willy was straight in there.

And now David’s threatening to go off and leave me too, find his fortune, but there ain’t no such thing, is there? Oh it’d break my heart if he left.

Sutch (off) Mum?! I’m home.

Annie Quick, he’s coming. You lot, you have to help me make him stay, right? Will you do that, boys and girls?

The audience respond. Annie looks in one direction off stage, as Sutch enters from the other.

Sutch (as ‘Jack’) Mum?

Annie (in the wrong direction) David, is that you? Where is he boys and girls?

A bit of shtick as they move around the stage, not seeing each other, as the audience presumably continue with the ‘He’s behind you’ routine.

Annie Oh there you are, David my love! Give your mum a kiss, then. (They kiss with big ‘mwahs’.)

And what do you say?

Sutch I’ve missed you, Mum.

Annie And?

Sutch I love you Mum.

Annie And?

Sutch And I’ll never leave you again.

Annie There’s a good boy. So, what news from the market?

Sutch All bad news today, I’m afraid. Prices. (Reading.) Eggs are going up.

Annie Well that’ll surprise a few chickens.

Sutch The milk’s gonna be late this week, too.

Annie That’ll cause a few sour faces.

Sutch But the navy are going out of their way to bring in some sugar.

Annie Ah how sweet.

Now then, David, how much did you get for our cow Daisy, down the market?

Sutch Oh wait till you see what I got, Mum.

Annie I’ve got a bad feeling about this, haven’t you boys and girls?

Sutch (returns with a washboard and a stick) Ta-dah.

Annie What the bleedin’ heck is that?!

Sutch You can turn it into an instrument. To make your own music with! Watch. He showed me.

(He has a go – badly.)

Well, I can’t really remember, but he said it’s all the rage, you don’t have to spend a wodge on a bit of brass from Mr Macgregor’s shop. It’s called ‘Skiffle’, anyone can do it, come all the way over from America.

Annie Oh well, it would, wouldn’t it? Don’t talk to me about Americans, David; there’s a lot that they bring over that you can’t shift.

A bit of fidgeting with her dress, hot and bothered.

Sutch I just have to practise, that’s all.

Annie Oh, that’s lovely, David. Only thing is, of course – we’ve already got one! We’re meant to be clearing out all our junk; getting in brand-new stuff. Honestly, I don’t know what I’m going to do with you. You need a father figure, that’s what.

And God knows, I’ve been trying.

Sutch Well, there’s always Uncle Benny. I like it when he comes over, to fix things, around the house, late at night, in your bedroom, with the door locked, and –

Annie (throaty and guttural now) Don’t you talk about Uncle Benny.

Sutch stares off into the ‘distance’. Perhaps some music . . .

Sutch I just want to make something of myself, Mum, that’s all. They’re building a bright future out there. And you don’t have to be a Lord anymore, or a Duke, or a Baron to enjoy it anymore. I just need to work out what I’m going to be. Who I’m going to be. My place in the world . . .

Annie Trust me, love. Staring out the window and dreaming ain’t for the likes of us. It’s one of the hardest things we have to learn, but learn it we must. To know our place. Why don’t you get your old job back? Nothing wrong with that factory, it’s where your dad worked, and his dad, and your Uncle Ben – . . . I said don’t you talk about Uncle Benny!! –

Sutch I want music and laughter and – colour. I want to go to London.

Annie We’re in London.

Sutch London, London. Soho, Piccadilly, the King’s Road. Where the streets are paved with gold.

Annie It’s the wrong fairytale, David.

Sutch I can do it, Mum, I can.

Annie No I mean literally, that’s the wrong one, we’re doing Jack and the What’s – it, and that’s . . .What’s – it, Whittington.

Sutch You’re thinking of Dick.

Annie I SAID DON’T TALK ABOUT UNCLE BEN –! (Stops, fans herself.)

Sutch I’m doing it, Mum! I’m sorry. But I have to try! (He runs off.)

Annie But David! David! Oh! (To an audience member.) Fat lot of good you were! You, see me afterwards. Dressing Room 1. Is that your missus? She can wait in the car, keep the engine running, we won’t be long. Goodbye, boys and girls.

She exits, waving, nearly bumping into –

The Band play the novelty work song ‘Right Said Fred’ as Workmen move furniture about.

Band ‘Right,’ said Fred, ‘Both of us together One each end and steady as we go.’

Tried to shift it, couldn’t even lift it We was getting nowhere

And so we had a cuppa tea and

‘Right,’ said Fred, ‘Give a shout for Charlie.’ Up comes Charlie from the floor below.

After strainin’, heavin’ and complainin’. We was getting nowhere

And so we had a cuppa tea.

And Charlie had a think, and he thought we ought to take off all the handles. And the things wot held the candles.

But it did no good, well I never thought it would!

Sutch (singing George Formby) ‘Now I go window cleaning, To earn an honest bob

For a nosy parker it’s an interesting job. Now it’s a job that just suits me

A window cleaner you would be. If you could see what I can see

When I’m cleaning windows.

BEDROOM FARCE

A bedroom in a guest house – a wardrobe either side of the bed. An entrance door on the other wall, a window at the back. Pauline, an American girl, lies in bed. Mrs Nichols the Landlady enters.

Mrs Nichols Oh, I am sorry love, you’re in bed.

Pauline That’s alright, Mrs Nichols. I’ve not been feeling too well, that’s all.

Mrs Nichols Oh? Oh, shame. Dicky tummy? ’Ere, I hope it weren’t them kippers, I didn’t like the look of them when I saw ’em, but I thought, well, waste not, want not. I was just looking for that window cleaner, you haven’t seen him, have you?

Pauline No, I’m afraid I haven’t.

Mrs Nichols There’s some more blankets in the wardrobe, I’ll fetch them –

Pauline (urgently). No, if you wouldn’t mind just closing the window, perhaps?

Mrs Nichols Oh yes of course dear.

Mrs Nichols moves to the window – as she does, back turned to the room, Sutch collapses half naked out of the wardrobe, hits the floor, grabbing his clothes, rolls under the bed, out the other side, up and into the opposite wardrobe, closing the door.

Mrs Nichols I knew he was no good, that window cleaner. Long hair. You see them now, these young lads with long hair, terrible. (Out the window.) Oh! He’s left his ladder! It’s here. Right up to your window, he’s just left it.

Pauline Strange.

Mrs Nichols His hearse is still there, as well!

Pauline His hearse?

Mrs Nichols Oh I know, don’t. He drives a funeral hearse, no idea why. Very peculiar. So, visiting the American base, did you say? That’s nice. Got a young fella there, have you?

Pauline Yes, he’s a pilot. Been in Germany, he’s back on leave.

Mrs Nichols I know, I’ll make you up some raspberry vinegar –

Pauline Oh, no, really, that’s –

Mrs Nichols No, trust me, dear, my old mum swore by it, you just rest – oi and if you see that window cleaner, say I want him to give yours a good seeing to.

She exits, slamming the door. Sutch collapses out of the wardrobe and gets back into bed.

Sutch Blimey, that was close. Mean old thing. What’s wrong with my long hair? I started this, you know, John Lennon nicked it clean off me, God’s honest truth, scouts honour. So, ‘Pauline’ was it? You’ve got a boyfriend then? Don’t suppose he’d be too happy with (whistles), all this, ey? Did I mention I was an aspiring musician?

Pauline And here’s me thinking you’re a window cleaner who drove a hearse.

Sutch Oh that. Only thing I could afford. But I am a bit into the old macabre, me. Zombies and monsters. ‘Ere, you wanna know who the real Zombies are – (at where Mrs Nichols exited) that lot. The ‘living dead’, just following all them what came before ’em. We’re gonna break that spell. Make our own moves, find our own sound. (Strums an air guitar.) Mwowwwww!

Pauline But I love all the old things here. We don’t have any history.

Sutch Pff, well, that’s all we have. I want a future.

Pauline I – I don’t normally do this, you know. You’re like ‘Peter Pan’, come to steal me away through the window. The Boy Who Won’t Grow Up. (Holding his hand – looking at it.) You have a birth mark.

Sutch Oh that’s not a birth mark, no. That was Churchill. He was walking up Kilburn High Road, and he saw me, and he came over to me, came right up to me, and tsssst. Dropped his cigar into my palm.

Pauline I don’t believe you.

Sutch Would I lie? What about you – any birth marks? (Tickling her under the covers.) I bet you’re used to strapping confident young American boys, aren’t you?

Pauline I like your sense of humour, here. It’s a bit – odd.

Sutch Well, we are a bit odd.

Pauline You’re – naughtier than I thought. You just bury it. Very, very deep.

Sutch Oh, I go very deep, me, as deep as you like –

Pauline (gasps) Someone’s coming up the ladder, quick!

Sutch jumps into the far side wardrobe as up through the window comes Pilot in flight uniform.

Pilot (American) Hey, Paul’.

Pauline What are you doing here?! You’re not meant to leave the base.

Pilot I snuck out. Didn’t think you’d lay a ladder on for me, that’s nice!

Mrs Nichols (off, approaching) Alright, dear, here we are –

Pauline Quick, she can’t catch you, she’ll throw me out.

Pilot Shoot. I’ll hide in that closet!

Pauline Yes – no wait! The other one –

But he’s rolling under the bed towards the far side wardrobe – just as he is, Sutch comes out of that wardrobe, rolls over the top of the bed, and into the other wardrobe, unseen by the Pilot who rolls out the other side and into the far wardrobe, closing the door as Mrs Nichols comes in with a tray.

Mrs Nichols Raspberry vinegar. Have a mouthful of that, perk you up. Now don’t make a fuss, one swallow, open wide.

(Feeling her forehead.) Oh dear, you’re burning up now. I’ll fetch a pack of peas up.

Pauline Oh, no, please, Mrs Nichols, really –

Mrs Nichols It’s no bother. She exits. Pilot comes out from the wardrobe.

Pilot Jeez, that was close.

Pauline You have to go, I mean it. I’ll see you later.

Pilot But I’m going out of my skin, Paul’, I can’t stop thinking about you. I mean I respect that you’re a good, god-faring, religious girl, but I wish you could bend the rules a little bit. Just for me.

Pilot is heading out the window and down, as Sutch creeps out of the near side wardrobe.

Pilot (feeling his head) Oh wait, my cap.

As he’s coming back in, Sutch ducks down and rolls under the bed.

Pilot It must have fell off under the bed.

Mr Nichols (outside, knocking on the door) Miss?

Pauline Quick!

She pushes Pilot into the near side wardrobe. Sutch rolls out from underneath the bed the other side nearest the door, just as Mr Nichols the landlord enters. Sutch hides behind the now open door.

Mr Nichols Alright, miss, the wife said to bring you up some peas –

Pauline Oh Mr Nichols!

Pauline flings herself at him, pulling him back with her on top of the bed to distract him as Sutch closes the main door and rolls back under the bed.

Pauline Oh! Oh, I’m so sorry, I’m all overcome.

Mr Nichols Miss, please, I’m a married man!

Mrs Nichols (approaching, outside) Everything alright in there?

Pauline Quick!

She pulls the duvet over them, hiding Mr Nichols as Mrs Nichols comes in.

Mrs Nichols Have you seen Mr Nichols, my dear – I sent him up to give you those peas.

Pauline No, I’m afraid I haven’t, Mrs Nichols.

Mrs Nichols And still no sign of the window cleaner. Men, ey? Never around, are they? Why don’t I run you a little bath? There’s towels under the bed.

As she looks under the bed, Sutch rolls out the other side, hops onto the bed and under the duvet.

Mrs Nichols Oh, that’s funny, they must be in this wardrobe.

Pauline (pointing at the window) He’s there! The window cleaner!

Mrs Nichols Where?!

She looks out of the window.

The Pilot leaps out the near side wardrobe, into the bed and under the duvet too. Someone sneezes.

Mrs Nichols turns round, looking at Pauline, surrounded by suspicious ‘lumps’.

Pauline Bless me.

Mrs Nichols strolls to the end of the bed, and slides the duvet off, revealing the men underneath.

Mrs Nichols Mr Nichols!

Sutch Oh-oh!

THE BENNY HILL SHOW

The ‘YAKETY SAX’ music kicks in, as everyone embarks upon the classic ‘running gag’ – moving at double speed, the men chased by Mrs Nichols around the room, out, back in again, splitting up – one going out, down the ladder, others into wardrobes, the person who went down the ladder comes back in through the door, and so on, eventually resulting in Sutch on his own in the room, collapsing onto the bed, pulling the duvet over himself.

A band member on a stool, with a washtub bass – a metal tub with a string attached to it.

Band member The idea is, that anyone can do it.

Other Band members hand out household items to the audience – spoons, egg shakers, a jug to blow into, a washboard to scrape.

They say it started in the deep south. You know, slaves. Wanting to make their own music, with anything they could find. So take something, anything from the box, pass it along. If you’ve got something to hit, make this kind of sound. (Demonstrate.) Or shake, this kind of rhythm, (demonstrates). And here we go.

The band members guide the audience, conducting and directing individuals to play with their ‘instruments’ in time, leading into LONNIE DONEGAN’s song ‘Puttin on the style’.

Band member (singing) ‘Putting on the agony, putting on the style That’s what all the young folk are a-doing all the while

And as I look around me I’m sometimes apt to smile. Seeing all the young folk, putting on the style.

Well a young man and his true love a-going to see the scenes Looking mostly like a bunch of garden greens

Gingerbread and candy eating all the while

Going to see the show, boys, putting on the style . . .’





Part Two

PETE AND DUD

From a gallery or in the auditorium itself, Peter Cook brings a pair of pints to sit with Dudley Moore. Eating sandwiches, observing the action.

Dud What do you make of it so far, then?

Pete What do I make of it?

Dud Yeah.

Pete Oh don’t get me started, Dud, I mean it, it’s scandalous, innit. It’s vulgar, a slippery slope. To what are you referring exactly?

Dud I don’t know –

Pete No, well, it doesn’t matter, does it, all going to the dogs, whatever it is. They’re all the bloody same, aren’t they. All in it for themselves.

Dud Who are?

Pete Well, whoever, it don’t matter, that’s my point. (At his paper.) See that, we can’t even take back a canal, these days, Dud. In my day, we took whole countries. A bloody canal.

Dud Maybe we’re worn out from all that taking of all the countries, Pete. Maybe it’s just a small blip on our, as it were, glorious road to recovery. Now that Macmillan’s in, he might sort it all out.

Pete Now him I like.

Dud Do yer?

Pete Yeah I do, shall I tell you why? This. (Referring to his own moustache.) Not afraid of some proper follicular adornments on the old top lip, Dud.

Dud Oh you mean his ‘tache?

Pete Yeah, that’s right, his ‘tache, yeah.

Dud Eden had a ‘tache, though. And Atlee. They all have ‘taches.

Pete They weren’t real ‘taches – the, the thick brushes of men, no.

Dud You voted for him then, did you – Macmillan?

Pete Me, course not. The Tories, no. You wanna hear a Tory about stories –

Dud What did you say –

Pete I said – (corpsing a little; smiling)

Dud (smiles back, in their classic corpsing style . . .)

Pete You’re smiling already, see, I knew you’d like this one –

Dud Yeah, funny that.

Pete A story about Tories. 13 of the cabinet, Dud. 13 of them went to the exact same school.

Dud Baker’s dozen?

Pete To the exact same bloody school. Nothing changes, not really.

Dud (with his newspaper) Oh I don’t know, look at this.

These kids, they’ve been winding him up, on stage.

Pete What kids?

Dud These Cambridge kids, kids from Cambridge University, taking the mickey out of him, in a theatre, our very own Prime Minister, there on the stage.

Pete You can’t do that, can you? Lacks respect.

Dud It does, yeah.

Pete It’s the music, I can’t get my head around, these young people. Screaming and shouting. I prefer the older stuff you can hum along to. (Hums a little something.)

Dud What’s that one then?

Pete It’s that Ambrosia Cream advert, innit.

Dud Oh yeah, that’s good, I like that one, yeah. You know which one I like?

Pete Which one?

Dud (singing) ‘All the family love Carnation.’

Dud/ Pete (singing along as well.) ‘Cause it’s double rich. All the family love Carnation!’

Dud See they don’t make ’em like that anymore, Pete.

Peter No, they don’t, no. What’s that one they played when the Queen –

Dud God bless her –

Pete Lovely woman, long may she reign – the one what she got coronated to. Honestly sometimes, my memory, I just can’t get a –

Dud Handel.

Pete I can’t get a handle on things, exactly.

Dud I like a bit of piano, me. Whose that, that German fella, played those lovey piano ones, God that takes me, erm –

Pete Bach.

Dud That takes me back, yeah.

Pete I prefer that Polish fella. Nope, name’s gone. Anyway, I can’t stay, I’ve got to go into town and do a bit of –

Dud Chopin.

Pete Yeah just pick up a couple of things, you know, stock the cupboards.

Dud Well you can’t go now, the act’s just starting . . .

Pete Oh yeah, who is it? Anyone good?

The lights dim, gothic music begins, horror movie sounds . . .

Sutch arrives on costume, wielding the axe at punters, as sings/ screams like a madman –

Sutch (singing) The Ripper, Jack The Ripper The Ripper, Jack The Ripper

There’s a man who walks the streets of London late at night The Ripper, Jack The Ripper

With a little black bag that’s oh-so tight The Ripper, Jack The Ripper

He’s got a big black cloak hangin’ down his back The Ripper, Jack The Ripper

That’s one big cat I just hate to fight The Ripper, Jack The Ripper When he walks down the streets

Every girl he meets he says; is your name Mary Kelly?

The lights get cut out.

THE GOON SHOW

A radio recording set-up – old BBC mics, and a foley artists standing by. The performers hold scripts.

Greenslade Forgive us, dear listeners, our airwaves must have been temporarily hijacked, but the calm, soothing, quiet dignity of the BBC has returned. You’re listening to the original talking type wireless Goon Show!

The band – now the ‘Ray Ellington’ band – play the theme.

Sutch The Sutch Household, Harrow, Greater London, England, in the dark old days, of 1963. An old woman is making supper, or as they called it in the north, tea, or as they called it in Scotland, lining your stomach.

Mother, I’m home!

Annie David, you’ve come home to me! But what are you doing handcuffed to that policeman?

Eccles Your son has been a very naughty boy.

Sutch They’ve closed my pirate radio station again, Mother – and they have no right!

Eccles He’s been twiddling his knobs, he has. And been sticking his antenna places he shouldn’t.

Annie They should never have cancelled national service, should they?

Eccles I don’t know, I never watched it.

Annie We’ll take it from here, Constable. Go on, go on, close that door.

Eccles OK.

The FX of a door closing. Beat.

Eccles Do you want me on the other side?

Annie Yes –

Eccles Oh –

Eccles leaves, closing the door behind him.

Annie Enough of these fantasies now, David. It’s time to grow up and settle down, here, in Harrow, with me.

Sutch Nobody settles now, Mother. We’re in the throes of a revolution!

Bailey and his photos, Marvin with his guitar, Berry and his voice! Me with my . . . with my – well, I’ll find something, you watch!

Annie You’ve not been the same since you came back from America.

Sutch Oh, Mother. I went there to find myself, but instead I got lost. Travelling to the West coast along Route 66. All the signs pointed to 8.124 recurring, and that’s when I realised, I’d taken the Square Route of 66 by mistake.

Greenslade ‘And now – the news.’

Sutch Wait, I’m not finished yet!

Greenslade ‘The Secretary of State for war John Profumo has resigned from the government, following revelations about his illicit affair with model Christine Keeler. A bi-election in Mr Profumo’s constituency of Stratford-upon-Avon will be announced shortly to fill the vacant seat.’

Sutch Wait a minute. A vacancy, did he say?

Greenslade ‘That’s right, a vacancy.’

Sutch A position – empty; a role – to be filled. That’s it! . . . Mother! I am going to be – a window cleane –!, no wait –

Greenslade He’ll get there, just give him a –

Sutch An MP!

Eccles By Jove, I think he’s got it.

The tubular sounds of the next theme as we arrive in –

HANCOCK’S HALF HOUR

Sutch (as Hancock) Hhhhhhancock’s Half Hour. Episode One. ‘The Returning Officer’.

The Returning Officer at his desk. Sutch arrives.

Sutch (as Hancock) Morning. I’ve come to stand.

Returning Officer I’m sorry?

Sutch I’d like to stand, please.

Returning Officer You . . . you are standing, sir.

Sutch Oh, good, that was easy.

Returning Officer Do you mean that you would like a seat?

Sutch Yes, I’d like this seat.

Returning Officer My seat?

Sutch Your seat? I thought the seat was empty, that’s why I wanted to stand.

Returning Officer Forgive me, sir, do you wish to stand, or do you want a seat?

Sutch I would like to stand, in this seat. To put myself forward.

Returning Officer Oh I see, you mean you’d like to put yourself forward to vote.

Sutch No, I’d – why is this so hard? Is the air thinner up here, in the Midlands? There’s a by-election going on, isn’t there? For Mr Profumo’s seat? Sleaze. Scandal. Degradation of the lowest order. Well, I’d like to join in, please. Here’s my nomination papers.

Returning Officer You’re . . . (stares at the papers. Stares at him.) You’re standing to become the Member for Stratford? But your address.

Sutch Yes, 23 Railway Cuttings, East Cheam, but obviously if I won I would move to Stratford. I was going to ask, actually, there is a Stratford in East London, and that would be much more convenient for me, cause then I could stay with my mum.

Returning Officer looks at him. At the papers. And around, for help.

Returning Officer Uh, I’m sorry, I’m just, I’m not sure what the, the protocol, is. For this. We’ve never had anyone just, just walk in off the street, and –

Sutch Well, anyone can stand, can’t they? So what do I do, just turn up on the day, then? Is it like giving blood, do I get an orange juice and a biscuit? Feel a bit faint afterwards?

Returning Officer Which part – . . . are you a candidate for a particular party?

Sutch I am. The National Teenage Party! (Tapping his form.)

Returning Officer I’ve never heard of it.

Sutch Of course you haven’t, I made it up.

Returning Officer Teenagers don’t have a vote.

Sutch I know, that’s why I want to represent them.

Returning Officer Sir, in order to stand you must have two signatories on your nomination papers –

Sutch I do. Pauline, my friend. Girl. As in she’s a girl, not my girlfriend, but, well, I don’t – we’ve never really, but –

Returning Officer And Annie Sutch?

Sutch That’s my mum.

Returning Officer (beat. Studies him) What are you doing?

Sutch Is there a problem, sir?

Returning Officer (standing, sternly) What. Are You Doing? This isn’t a joke, young man.

Sutch Isn’t it? I thought it was.

Returning Officer I beg pardon?

Sutch I thought the whole thing was a joke. You’ve been made a laughing stock of, the whole thing has. And I’d like to be a part of it, sounds fun.

Returning Officer Do you have your deposit? In order to stand, we require a payment of One Hundred and Fifty Pounds.

Sutch . . . You what? One Hundred and Fifty knicker? Why?

Returning Officer It’s to demonstrate that you are serious.

Sutch But I’m not serious.

Returning Officer Well then you cannot stand.

Sutch But I thought that anyone could stand.

Returning Officer Anyone, technically, can stand. But you have to demonstrate. That you are serious –

Sutch But I’m not!

Returning Officer – by paying a deposit!

Sutch But I haven’t got a deposit!

Returning Officer Well then you cannot be serious!

Sutch I’m not!

Returning Officer Well then GO AWAY!

Sutch . . . alright. I’ll play your game. Wait here.

Sutch sticks his fez on and steps into –

TOMMY COOPER

Sutch (as ‘COOPER’) Alright ladies and gents, empty bag, nothing inside, before your very eyes, I will magic from inside, a hundred and fifty pounds . . .

Bag, hand, hand, bag, hundred fifty quid . . .

He’s about to start, and then stops to chat, in classic Cooper fashion.

You know, the other day, I went to vote in the election, and I turned up at my local polling station, soon as I walked in, everyone else waved and left. It was a ‘bye election’.

I said to the lady there, I said, ‘what do I do, put a tick next to my choice?’ She said, ‘cross, if you wouldn’t mind’, I said (cross) ‘WHAT DO I DO PUT A TICK NEXT TO ME CHOICE?!’

He grins, inanely. Back to the trick.

Bag, hand, hand, bag, hundred fifty quid in cash, and . . .

He reaches in, and pulls out a piece of paper with black and white squares on it. He sighs.

Cheque.

Beat. He blows it away.

Travellers cheque. Ahah!

Thank you, thank you. Knock knock. I said knock knock.

The audience – ‘Who’s there?’ Your local candidate. ‘Your local candidate, who?’

Your local candidate standing to be MP! Just like that!

CARRY ON CAMPAIGNING!

‘The Dirty Duck’ pub, in Stratford.

The campaign headquarters. David (as SID JAMES) has on a more outrageous and colourful jacket. He’s working on banners/flyers with Pauline – now as BARBARA WINDSOR. Stuart Hughes (as KENNETH WILLIAMS).

Stuart Ooh I say. You both look so – ‘colourful’.

Sutch Why thank you.

Stuart I was expecting you to be more – straight.

Sutch What are you implying?

Pauline (holding up two placards, at chest level) Are these big enough?

Sutch I should say so. (Sid James laugh.)

Pauline Come on in, then. We’re having a party!

Sutch No, love, we’ve been over this. We’re forming a party.

Pauline Have you come to get stuck in?

Stuart Oh well, I say. I’m Stuart Hughes, I heard all about this on the news, down in Plymouth. I thought it sounded terribly important you know. So, completely out of character, on a whim, I hopped on a train, and – here I am.

Sutch David Sutch. More the merrier. Come on then, let’s start the march.

Stuart And where are you marching to, exactly?

Sutch Oh nowhere, really. Just round and round.

Stuart (towards outside) I can’t believe that you’ve actually got people to – to follow you. They’re all waiting, outside. Hundreds of ’em, how’d you do it?

Sutch (shrugs) Dunno really. People have got to follow something.

Andrew Faulds (as BRIAN BLESSED), the big, booming, commanding actor, enters.

Faulds Sutch?! David Sutch?!

Pauline Oh my God, it’s God!

Faulds Show yourself man!

Sutch I am he!

Faulds Andrew Faulds, the actor, from over the road. Your Labour opponent.

Sutch Oh yeah! We met at the debate last weekend. Bunch of fascists, throwing me out.

Faulds You sat in the Deputy Mayor’s chair, sir.

Sutch (laughs)

Stuart Sat in his chair? Gosh, I bet that put the willies up him.

Sutch What, it’s only a chair, for gawd’s sake.

Faulds I am here to ask you (gesturing at the room), not to carry on with this tom foolery.

Pauline (to Stuart) I thought you said your name was Stuart.

Faulds Ye gads, man, your campaign headquarters is in the middle of a pub!

Sutch The refuge of the common man, Mr Faulds. The perfect place to start a people’s revolution. It’s where thingy Tyler began his Peasant’s Revolt.

Faulds Wat.

Sutch (louder) I said it’s where thingy Tyler began his Peasant’s Revolt.

Faulds Sir, you know very well that you have no chance of winning. You’re just going to pull votes away from those who can.

Sutch What’s winning got to do with it?

Faulds What’s wi – . . . what’s winning got to do with it?! How can you do anything unless you win? Power is the point!

Sutch Power is the point? But what’s the point in power, then, if power is the point?

Faulds (he seethes. Tries to calm. Sees a framed picture on the wall) That’s me. Iago. 1959. The Dirty Duck has been the drinking hole of Britain’s finest actors over the years. You know what makes a bad actor. Sutch? No truth. Putting on a mask, it isn’t to conceal. It is to re-veal. You have no ‘truth’, Mr Sutch. You are a fool! A Falstaff. A Bottom!

Pauline Oh David, just turn the other cheek.

Stuart Although ironically of course, in the past, it was only the fool, the jester, you know, who was allowed to call the king out for what he truly was, simply by making him laugh.

Sutch There you are, yer see? Look at you – in yer suit, and yer hat. You look exactly like all the rest of them.

Faulds Labour must look more – ‘professional’, to beat them at their own game. But we’re still the outsiders. You stand up there on stage, you make me look the bloody establishment too! And if I lose this chance to kick that Tory bastard out of Stratford because of you, I swear to God! (He turns to leave. Beat. Turns back.)

‘O, what men dare do.

What men may do! What men daily do . . . Not knowing what they do.’

He exits. Sutch snatches the framed photo off the wall and pockets it, stepping into:

THE CLASS SKETCH – FROST REPORT

The three candidates, standing in a line, a la CLEESE, BARKER and CORBETT . . .

Voice As the returning officer for the Stratford constituency, please may I ask that all candidates come up onto the stage, for the results of the count . . .

Tory I look down on him, because I am a Conservative, and we are the natural party of government.

Labour I look up to him, because he is a Conservative. But I look down on him, because he is an independent. I am Labour.

Sutch I know my place.

Voice And the results for the Stratford-upon-Avon bi-election are: Angus Maude, Conservatives . . . 15,846. (He nods – some polite applause.) Andrew Faulds, Labour . . . 12,376. (Some polite applause.)

David Sutch. Nat – . . . National Teenage Party . . . 209. Some laughter heard – but Sutch, first with surprise. Sutch Two hundred and nine . . .?

He’s moved. Overcome with joy. He opens his arms wide to the crowd, as their mocking laughter slowly turns to cheers. Louder and louder – the others disappearing into darkness as he is bathed in light, soaking in the love of the crowd . . .

The Band Leader strikes up with Bob Dylan’s 1960s Protest Song, ‘The Times they are a’changing’.

Sutch ‘Come gather ‘round people, wherever you roam And admit that the waters around you have grown

And accept it that soon you’ll be drenched to the bone If your time to you is worth savin’

Then you better start swimmin’ or you’ll sink like a stone For the times they are a-changin’.’

Band Member (kicking into a new phrase on his keyboard) Alright, Ladies and Gents, it’s Bingo time, get your cards out, come on, that’s it, your daubers and your dabbers, eyes down, and listen out for any numbers coming up in this next bit – it’s a good bit, you’ll like it – you know the rules, call out Bingo when you get a line.

TILL DEATH US DO PART

The Sutch home, 1966 – Uncle Benny (ALF GARNETT) sits reading his paper in his armchair, mum Annie (ELSE) knitting in her armchair, Sutch (MIKE) and Pauline (RITA) on the sofa.

Sutch I’m going to stand! In the General Election, this time.

Benny Going to stand? Going to stand, he says. You already bleedin’ stood, didn’cha, and you bloody lost.

Sutch Mum, people voted for me. Two hundred and nine votes – that’s two, zero, nine. They actually put a cross next to my name.

Benny I’m always cross, next to you. Scouse git.

Sutch Lot of young people.

Benny Well they would, wouldn’t they, don’t know their arse from their elbows. You raised a generation, Annie, don’t know their arse from their elbows.

Annie Oh blame it all on me, I gave birth to the whole lot of ’em, didn’t I?

Benny You gave birth to this one, you silly moo. Nothing to do with me.

All of ’em, don’t know a proper day’s work. Respect, for God, or the Queen. Don’t know proper decency; cavorting about with one another. Like this one, who’s this one then?

Pauline My name is Pauline. And we’re – old friends.

Benny Friends. You see? ‘Friends.’ How old are yer?

Pauline 27.

Sutch (calling out the number) 27!

Benny In my day, you didn’t have friends and partners and bits on the side, your age, you got married.

Pauline Yes and then you had unhappiness and self-loathing and abuse.

Sutch I don’t know why no one’s tried it before. It’s so easy. You should have seen them! They were furious! Haha! So I’m doing it again. Fight for change!

Benny ‘Change’, is that a eupher-what’s-it? A silly-nym for ‘destruction’, ‘abandonment’. ‘Decline’. Giving away the whole Empire that took good decent Conservatives centuries to build up.

Pauline It’s giving it back to the people who it belongs to.

Benny They don’t bloody want it! You give it ’em back and what do they do, they all come over here! By the boat load. Like them just moved back into Number 17. (Sutch repeats.) And Number 43. (Sutch repeats.) AND Number 35! (Sutch repeats)

Many audience members shout Bingo! – they all have the same numbers.

Benny Oh, look at that! Well there’s too many of yer, obviously! Ain’t enough to go round! Coming in here, wanting something for nothing! (Back to Pauline.)

We were told we didn’t need an Empire no more, that we was gonna stand on our own two feet. Proud! Didn’t want be in their European ‘club’, thank you. Only then what?! The Yanks gave us the cold shoulder cause of Vietnam!, so we’re back begging the Frogs to join them! Begging, as though we didn’t save them in the war, which we’re still paying for, with the bloody Yanks!

We need to remember the ‘Great’ in Great Britain.

Pauline Well what is the ‘great’ in Great Britain?

Benny It’s . . . well it, it’s . . . well it’s our past, innit!

Pauline There’s got to be something more that’s just our past, Uncle Benny!

Sutch See, all your lot do, Uncle Benny, is moan.

Benny I’ve a right to moan, I fought. Did you fight?! Did you?

Sutch You think democracy is a spectator sport, whinging from the sidelines.

I want to participate, not just observe. Stick it straight to the man. To –

(Gasps!) That’s it. I’ll stand against . . . the Prime Minister.

Annie Oh that’s nice, love.

Pauline The Prime Minister?! David, you can’t. Can you?

Sutch I don’t know. There’s no rule that says you can’t. They have to let you. They’re going to have to let me stand there next to him on that stage. As an equal!

How hard can it be?

(Does a Harold Wilson.) ‘It is finally time, to forge, a New Britain, in the White Heat, of Revolution.’

Benny Grrrrr!

Annie You leave him be. This is mine and David’s home, but you had your feet under the table pretty sharpish, ey? Don’t mind that, do yer?

Benny I was invited! And if you don’t want me here then I’ll go! (He exits.)

Pauline Why don’t you go back to your music?

Sutch I can keep the band going with this.

Annie I wouldn’t put all your eggs in that basket, love, don’t get me wrong but you’re no Shirley Bassey or . . . Tom Jones. (Fans herself.)

Sutch Hate Tom Jones. I hate Shirley Bassey. It wasn’t meant to be about them, all, all starry and packaged with their deals, and, and – it was meant to be –

Annie What about our bric and brac shop, all that stuff you’ve been collecting over the years – just sat there in the loft. We could make a go of that.

Sutch I want to try this, Mum. I can show ’em all. Make you proud o’ me.

Annie Did I do something wrong, David, was it me? I know you was lacking a father figure but I tried my best. People say that there’s a few screws loose. That’s all.

Sutch . . . well then I should be around others with screws loose, shouldn’t I?

Annie The mad house?

Sutch Exactly. I’m standing for parliament. Again.

A band member, with an electric guitar, tuning it.

Band member (to the audience) Alright guys. You can all do this one, that’s the point.

Demonstrates with his hand in the air.

Fingers in this position, all of you. Go on, hand in the air. That’s an ‘A’.

The audience get their fingers in that position. He looks around at a few.

Good – not bad – good – terrible – Good. You look like you’re giving me the finger, sir. Oh you are giving me the finger, well, the same to you.

Next one. ‘E’. Everyone.

They do it.

And. ‘G’.

They all do it.

You, sir, you’re pretty accomplished, would you mind turning around and showing the people behind you up close what those chords are, again. ‘A’. ‘E’. Then ‘G’.

The member of the audience, hopefully, engages some of those around him or her with the chords.

Right. You’re all punk rockers. And all you need is three chords. Now. Go and start a band.

The band member plays the three chords, as the audience hand mime them.

He continues, and it becomes clear that the song is GOD SAVE THE QUEEN, by the Sex Pistols.

THE YOUNG ONES

The Huyton results – 1974 General Election.

A line of three, again – Harold Wilson ( EDMONSON), the Tory William Peters. (PLANER), and Sutch (MAYALL). An Announcer.

Announcer And the results of the Huyton Constituency. Harold Wilson, Labour . . . 41,222.

Wilson (makes some Edmonson-like gobble-de-gook noise of elation) Ee-lala-la-yargh!

Announcer T L Hobday, Conservative . . . 20,182.

Planer (makes some sad, Planer-like moan) Oh . . . er . . . hmmmm well . . .

Announcer David Sutch . . . 585.

Sutch (punk-like celebration) Aaahh!!

All of them begin jumping up and down, moshing and trashing the stage . . .

MORECAMBE AND WISE

Sutch (as ERIC MORECAMBE) and Wise, in their trademark introductory stance.

Morecambe So what do you think of it so far?

Wise There’s no answer to that.

Moreambe No.

Wise Can I ask you a personal question?

Morecambe Of course, ask away my little friend, ask away (slaps his cheeks).

Wise Do you like to be fully in, or do you prefer to pull out? Morecambe I – beg – your – pardon?

Wise The continental question. We’re hitting the polls again.

Morecambe The Poles, why, it’s not their fault, is it? And wait a minute, wait a minute. I thought, uh . . . (looking around, confidentially). I thought we were already spoken for. You know, the ‘special relationship’, with (whistles).

No, Mr Heath says our ‘natural relationship’ is with this ‘other lot’.

Morecambe Oh I see. Wait a minute, wait a minute . . . I thought, we’d already consummated a ‘union’.

Wise Oh you mean the kingdom?

Morecambe Yes.

Wise Well, Mr Wilson’s holding a referendum on that too; They might want to break up with us. I don’t think they feel loved.

Morecambe Oh, well. Wait. WAIT! What about the kids?

Wise The kids?

Morecambe You know. From the first marriage – the Commonwealth.

Wise Oh yes, I’d forgotten those.

Morecambe Gosh it’s all very confusing.

Wise It is very confusing.

Morecambe All these responsibilities. I’ve had to take on a second job, you know.

Wise A second job?

Morecambe Oh yes.

Wise Some would say you barely take on your first job.

Morecambe I . . . (suddenly looks perplexed, at Ernie, the audience, grinds his teeth).

Wise What’s the second one?

Morecambe I announce the General Election results.

Wise You? You announce the election results, that’s you?

Morecambe Very important job, yes, oh yes.

Wise Well you’re not very good at it, are you?

Morecambe Beg pardon?

Wise Well how come in the last one, the Conservatives got more votes, but Labour got more seats. And the Liberals, they got more votes than they got last time, but less seats than they had before – all creating a hung parliament where nobody knew who had won or lost, I mean, it doesn’t make any sense.

Morecambe Well democracy is very complicated, see, it’s a very complicated system.

Wise Are you sure you aren’t just announcing all the wrong results?

Morecambe looks away, and then turns in close to Wise, taking him by the lapels.

Morecambe I am announcing all the right results. But not necessarily, in the right order . . .

Lights cut out. Sutch is alone. On each screen is a different comedian, ghosts from the past, looking at him. Spike Milligan . . . Tony Hancock . . . Kenneth Williams . . . Stephen Fry . . .

A slightly distorted version of ‘Bring Me Sunshine’ continues, far off somewhere . . .

Sutch . . . Doctor, doctor! I feel a bit – funny.

The Monty Python theme from the band.

The TVs flicker to an animated video montage, in the Python style, beginning with Sutch standing on stage with Harold Wilson, possibly the real image of him forcing Wilson to shake his hand.

It grows increasingly absurd, with Sutch pasted into historic scenes, given undue significance. The England World Cup win . . . playing as the fifth Beatle . . . with the Royal Family on famous balcony for the Silver Jubilee . . .

It ends with a Dad’s Army-style graphic of the Union Jack arrow entering Europe, and then pulling back again, then entering, and then pulling back out again, before everything is eventually squashed by a giant foot.

MONTY PYTHON (all new)

A doctor’s surgery. Sutch (MICHAEL PALIN) stood waiting as Doctor (JOHN CLEESE) arrives with a clipboard of notes, along with Matron (TERRY JONES).

Doctor Sorry to keep you. Now, what seems to be the problem?

Sutch Oh doctor, doctor. I feel funny.

Matron (feels him, and laughs) Hoho yes you do feel funny, don’t you.

Doctor (feeling him too) Oh yes, haha. Well don’t worry, if we do operate we’ll have you in stitches in no time. (Laughing hard, with the Matron.) Have you in stiches, Matron! Haha.

Sutch I don’t feel myself.

Doctor Good, you shouldn’t feel yourself, filthy habit.

Matron Oh he’s a very naughty boy, isn’t he? Now sit. Cross your legs.

Sutch I don’t always know who I am. Where I’m meant to be going.

They sit Sutch down and tap below his knee for reflexes. Sutch’s leg begins to stretch out, as he stands and does the ‘Cleese’-like funny walk – legs going one way and then circling round the other.

Sutch See? Part of me wants to go that way, and the same time the other part of me wants to go that way. So I end up getting stuck in a loop, and it’s driving me mad.

Doctor Well, madness is doing the same thing over and over and expecting . . . (thinks, looking down at the room) what’s that saying?

Matron (at where he’s looking on his board) You’re next appointment is at 4.

Doctor Excellent. Well. It sounds like a touch of the old ‘black dog’. That’s what Churchill used to call it, didn’t he?

Sutch (at his palm) Did he?

Doctor Well we can help with that.

Sutch Are you a head doctor?

Doctor I took a course in psychiatry, yes.

Sutch (tapping the script on his clipboard) No I mean are you ahead, I think we’ve skipped forward.

Doctor Oh I’m sorry. Where were we?

Matron Just over here.

They take a hop away from the desk.

Sutch I’m just a bit low, that’s all.

Doctor Matron, something to prop the patient up perhaps?

Matron (bringing some cushions, placing them on his seat) There we are. That’s the nurse’s. That’s the policeman’s. And that’s the vicar’s.

Doctor What are they?

Matron Pillows of the community.

They laugh hard, repeating ‘pillows of the –!’ as Matron sits Sutch back down on the chair.

Doctor There you are, see, you’re funnier already.

Sutch I am?

Doctor Yes look, you’re sat-higher. (Laughs.) Satire! Haha.

Finally, any other symptoms?

Sutch I feel angry, at the rest of the world. The Germans have left a bad taste in my mouth.

Doctor Case of the sour krauts, OK.

Sutch In Spain it’s like I’m treading on egg shells the whole time.

Doctor Spanish omelette, I’ve got yer.

Sutch And the French are always taking the piss.

Doctor Well we could try removing de Gualle bladder – de Gaulle bladder! Hahaha!

Matron De Gaulle bladder!

Doctor (standing) Now, seriously. Because this is very serious. Yes. It’s clear to me that you are suffering from a condition known as – the Sick Man of Europe syndrome.

Sutch I am?

Matron and Doctor work on him as they talk, a pressure strap around his arm for blood, thermometer in his mouth, glasses over his eyes, etc.

Doctor Yes, you’re running very high inflation. Growth is stunted. I can barely detect a pulse anymore. You’ve grown incredibly short-sighted. Sometimes you want to go Left. Other times you want go Right. And so you’ve developed an acute paralysis, built up over time. I mean you’re not getting any younger, are you. Might be time to calm down a bit. Stop going round and round in circles. And just, well – just ‘be’.

Sutch (beat. Sighs) You mean . . . settle. ‘If you want to be happy . . . be’.

Matron Who said that?

Sutch Trotsky.

Matron Oh no. He’s got the Trots as well!

All WHEY!

STEPTOE AND SON

Annie Sutch (now ALBERT STEPTOE) decrepit and seated in a junk-filled hovel, drying old newspapers with a hair dryer. Sutch (HAROLD) enters, carrying carrier bags of more junk.

Sutch Oh gawd, what’s she doing now, I don’t know if I can bear it.

Annie What’s your problem?

Sutch What’s my problem, Mum? It’s about five foot five, 12 stones, and coming on for a hundred and fifty years old, can you guess?

Annie Pick anything good up today?

Sutch Pick anything good up, she says. Well let’s see, shall we? (Removing some items.) Exhibit A, your Dis-honour. An iron, that doesn’t heat up. A torch, that doesn’t light. And a child’s rainbow-coloured skipping rope, that probably doesn’t skip. All found on the great streets of our capital city.

Annie Skipping rope might fetch something.

Sutch I ain’t selling that, I’m keeping it for emergencies! (He imitates hanging himself with it.)

What are you doing? (Snatches a paper, looks.) This is Monday’s newspaper.

Annie I know.

Sutch A Monday, from almost a year ago.

Annie I know! I’m going to flog it next Monday, no one will notice.

Sutch The bleeding Falklands is on the front page!

Annie So what? People are stupid. They’ll think we’ve gone in again.

Sutch Gone in again! No one knows why we went in the first time! You dirty, old – ‘mam’. Have we really sunk so low?

Look at this place. The same old stuff – old, tired, broke. We wipe it clean and flog it on, and still it comes back, again and again. I thought we were going to be dealing in fine antiques, not tat.

Annie What’s the difference?

Sutch (coming forward). What’s the difference? (Sort of referencing her.) A bit of old tat has no value, and nobody wants it. (Sort of referencing himself.) An antique has rare hidden qualities that one would appreciate if one ever took the time only to look.

Annie All looks the same to me.

Sutch I’ve had enough, I’m clearing out all of this stuff, I’m sick of it, it’s weighing me down, I can’t escape from it.

He pulls out a makeshift tombola machine – or just a box with raffle tickets inside!

Alright, everyone. Look at all these treasures from across the Empire, our long island history and beyond. It’s raffle time, you got your tickets ready, look at all these prizes, oh yes yours for the taking, come, first prize, is, number . . .

He reads out a number, someone claims it, he hands them something from the junk.

There you go, that’s priceless – and I really mean that, there is literally no price on that. Next one, come on . . .Oh, sod it, we’re all winners here.

He hands out another bit of junk, and another, not pausing now to pull tickets, just trying to clear the junk, until . . . he finds the washboard from the Panto. He pauses, clutching it . . . Remembering . . .

Annie You can’t do it, can you..?

Sutch (beat. He begins collecting the prizes back from the audience) Sorry about this, there’s been a mistake, hand ’em back please. Come on, all of it.

He gets them all, dumping them back on the pile. A moment.

Annie You need all this old junk as much as me, and you know it. Have the dark clouds gathered again?

Sutch Yes.

Annie Feeling of rain . . .

Sutch Yes.

Annie . . . it’ll pass. You know it will. Sun always comes out in the end.

Sutch (struggles) I . . . I shouldn’t be here. I thought I was going to do something. I’ve tried being a solo artist, being a band. I’ve tried changing the band, leading the band, supporting other bands, being a tribute band, being a supporting band to tribute band, I can’t . . . I can’t find it, Mum . . .

. . . Well the ‘fortune of the house stands’. Ey.

Annie Why don’t you stand again, you always enjoy that.

Sutch Oh – that’s just . . . a laugh. I’m not even a member of a party. Who would have me?

Annie I never get invited to parties, neither.

Sutch . . . Wait. What did you say? A . . . a party . . .

He rummages around the junk again, pulling out different party items – party poppers, a party horn.

If they won’t invite me to one of their parties. I’ll just have my own! And everyone will be invited. And it will be the wildest, craziest party EVER!

He pops his popper and blows his horn.





Part Three

SOME MOTHER’S DO ‘AVE ‘EM

A television interview – Sutch (FRANK SPENCER), seated opposite Michael Parkinson.

Parkinson So, you’ve formed your own political party, is that right?

Sutch Yes, well, I was getting in a bit of bother, just doing it on my own, so I thought I’d better get some people behind me, you know, do it right (nervous laugh).

Parkinson And it’s called – The Monster Raving Loony Party?

Sutch That’s right. (Feels around for something in his pocket. Can’t find it. The other pocket. Retrieves a dog’s squeaky toy. He squeaks it. Puts it back in his pocket.)

Parkinson And this is a genuine – a genuine political party?

Sutch Yes.

Parkinson It’s not a joke?

Sutch Yes.

Parkinson Y – . . .? It is a joke or it is a political party?

Sutch Yes it is a joke, yes, it is a political party.

Parkinson (beat) And your membership has increased. You’re planning to field, well, several candidates at the next election?

Sutch Oh yes, we’re going to be standing in seats from John’s End to the Land of Groats. Up and down the land. Not just up and down, but side to side and diagonally as well. In fact we have our first Party Conference in September, down in Ashburton in Devon –

Parkinson Why Ashburton?

Sutch Well, our Chairman Alan Hope – hello Alan – he runs the Golden Lion pub down there. Also, most of our members seem to be drawn from the South West. I think they’re a bit nutty down there, which is very helpful.

Parkinson Do you have any principles?

Sutch Any principles? (Thinks.) No, we have a couple of caretakers, I think, and one dinner lady, but no actual principals.

Parkinson Any policies? Where do you stand on unemployment?

Sutch Well, we won’t stand for it.

Parkinson What are you ideas for dealing with it?

Sutch Well, I’m glad that you asked, we’ve been exploring ways in which to shorten the dole queue. For a start, we’re just going to make everyone stand much closer together.

Parkinson What would you do about crime in this country?

Sutch Ooh yes, well, prisons are very overcrowded you know. And so I came up with the idea of just releasing all of the innocent prisoners. And that would free up some space for the guilty ones, see?

Parkinson So is this the Anglo equivalent of, of European Dadaism, mocking the status quo by, by pointing to its illogical absurdities, is it, is it a postmodern form of philosophical anarchism? What’s the ‘act’, I guess I’m saying, when you’re on that stage at the counts. Why do you do it? I – I don’t get it.

Sutch (beat, smiles) I’m just standing there. That’s all. Just standing there.

Parkinson ‘Sic transit gloria’, as it were.

Sutch What’s that, Latin? I’m sorry, I’ve never been –

Parkinson Mr Sutch –

Sutch It’s Lord Sutch, actually, I didn’t wait in line at the town hall for 25 minutes to change my name by deed poll just to be called ‘mister’, you know.

Parkinson You really are, really quite mad. Aren’t you?

Sutch (. . . beat. Smiles. Defiantly.) Well. I’m British. And we’re all a bit odd.

Parkinson You still live at home, with your mother, if I’m not mistaken.

Sutch Yes, she – she needs me.

Parkinson Will you be moving her into Number 10 when you’re elected?

Sutch I don’t know, I’ll have to see what the loft space is like, because we’ve got a lot of things, priceless artefacts you know. We’re going to open up a bric and brac store, you see. Bits and pieces of everything, something for everyone.

Parkinson Any other policies you want to pitch? Lord Sutch?

Sutch . . . erm . . . Yes, we’re going to abolish January and February. Because they’re just too . . . they’re just too cold. (He shivers a little, suddenly feeling a bit exposed.)

Parkinson . . . Screaming Lord Sutch. Thank you.

HI-DE-HI

The Golden Lion pub. ‘The Monster Raving Loony Party’ conference around a table.

Sutch (PAUL SHANE), Pauline (RUTH MADDOC), Stuart (SIMON CADELL), Alan Hope (JEFFREY HOLLAND), and the pub’s Barmaid (SUE POLLARD).

Pauline plays out a tune on her xylophone.

Pauline Good morning, campers! Hi-de-Hi!

The audience – hopefully – reply with ‘Ho-de-Ho!’

Today’s activity will be a party conference with the Monster Raving Loony Party!

Stuart and the Barmaid are handing items out to the audience from a box of silly wigs, hats, fake noses, stupid glasses et al.

Pauline Come on now, don’t be shy. You get out what you put in. We don’t need those fancy holidays abroad, am I right? Full of snobs, ey. We want our dancing and singing and our 2p machines, that go like that – back and forth, win a coin, spend a coin, pushing out another coin, and then spend that coin. I love them, I do.

Oh where’s my head gone. Ladies and gentleman, please welcome, the party leader, Screaming Lord Sutch.

Sutch (hitting a squeaky toy hammer down on the table) I officially declare the first official meeting of the Official Monster Raving Loony party . . . CLOSED! I mean, OPEN! (Hammer down again.)

All Whey!

Barmaid Gosh, I’m so excited. I’m going to be a politician.

Alan This girl’s potty.

Sutch We’re all potty. Anyone who isn’t, shall be excommunicated from the party. And so to the first round of business then, ‘appointments’. A motion has been put forward by party chairman Alan Howling Laud Hope, that Cat Mandhu, here, (lifting a cat cuddly toy onto the table) be elected as our Shadow Secretary of State to the Treasury, for reasons being, and I quote (with his notes), ‘he’ll be the most adept at milking the taxpayer, sinking his claws into the rich, and by a whisker, he has the firmest grasp of “fish cull” policy here.

(to the audience) Let’s put it to a party vote. All those in favour raise their hand. Hi-de-hi?!

Everyone Ho-de-Ho!

Sutch (squeaky hammer down) Motion carried. Congratulations Cat Mandhu.

Pauline Shall we share our ideas for the election?

Sutch Yes Pauline, let’s.

Stuart I’ll go first if that’s OK?

Sutch Policy away, Stuart, policy away.

Stuart (clears his throat) Well. We’ve had discussions in the past to advocate a complete abolition of income tax on the grounds it was only supposed to be a temporary measure to pay for the Napoleonic Wars. I say we make that a staple pledge in our election manifesto.

Sutch All in favour in the room, say (blows a raspberry).

Everyone (blows a raspberry).

Sutch (squeaky hammer down) Motion carried.

Stuart Oh. OK great, thank you.

Sutch More!

Alan How about we invent a 99p coin to save on change. The Number of 1ps we need in circulation just to get change from a pound, we could save a fortune.

Barmaid Good. I like that one.

Sutch Me too. Excellent. 99p coins! All in favour go brrrrrrr. (Hammer down.) Pauline, any more?

Pauline Well it’s never felt right to me that there’s only one Monopolies Commission. Shouldn’t we form another one?

Sutch All in favour say nnnnaaaaaah.

Everyone nnnnaaaaaah.

Sutch (hammer down) Now, I was thinking – oh, anything to add Cat Mandhu?

. . . Paws for thought.

Everyone imitates the cat, putting their ‘paws’ on the table, waiting . . .

Sutch Excellent. Now then.

Pauline I suppose we should talk about who’s fighting for what seats this year.

Stuart Yes. Well, Chris ‘Screwy’ driver wants to fight the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. Looney Lord Tiverton wants to fight Hastings and Rye, and we’ve got Freddie Zap –

Alan Freddie Zap, whose that?

Barmaid He’s the fire-eating DJ in Cornwall.

Stuart He wants to challenge Cambourne and Redruth.

Sutch Marvellous. (Hammer down.)

Stuart And well, I erm – (clear his throat). I wouldn’t mind, you know. Sticking my – putting my name, erm. Forward. For a seat.

Barmaid You? But you’re even more of a wet blanket than I am, Stuart.

Alan Sure you’re up to it, Stu?

Sutch Course he’s up to it. Sold. (Hammer down.) And to that end, then, I feel like we must draw up one last amendment to the Official Monster Raving Loony constitution. That if anyone here present, or anyone representing the Loony Party across the country, ever, ever, successfully wins a seat onto a council or in Parliament . . . their names shall be struck off the register, and they shall not be allowed to march under the monster moniker ever again!

(as PUNCH). That’s the way to do it!

PUNCH AND JUDY

A puppet show set-up. PUNCH, dressed as SUTCH, with a placard, protesting – ‘Vote for me’, ‘Vote for me’.

A traditional POLICEMAN arrives, trying to stop him. SUTCH begins hitting him with the placard. He runs off.

Then, from behind SUTCH, to ominous music, JUDY appears – as Margaret Thatcher. She starts hitting Sutch with her handbag. He sinks away.

YES, MINISTER

In place of where Pete and Dud normally sit, at a table in the club or the auditorium, a Civil Servant (SIR HUMPHREY) brings over sherry for himself and the Minister (JIM HACKER).

Civil Servant There you are, Minister.

Minister Thank you, Humphrey. (Looks around.) Goodness me, what is this place?

Civil Servant I believe they call it a Working Men’s Club, Minister. Think of it like the Carlton Club, sir, only they’ll let anyone in.

Minister Oh you mean like The Groucho. Haha. Well not much ‘working’ going on in here, is there? Rather proves our point, I’d say.

Civil Servant The Prime Minister is very worried, Minister.

Minister Of course she is, Humphrey, it’s a Prime Minister’s job to worry. It’s when she stops worrying that we need to worry.

Civil Servant It’s about the upcoming General Election.

Minister The polls have us winning by a landslide.

Civil Servant She’s worried about the potential for humiliation.

Minister Humphrey, what has the past eight years taught us? The potential for humiliation is around us constantly. Every time we open our mouth, every time we step out of the door, every time we come up with an idea, every time we don’t come up with an idea. All depends on how you look at it.

Civil Servant Well, how she looks at it . . . is that she doesn’t want her acceptance speech to look like this. (Handing him a photo.)

Minister Oh, yes. This chap. Well, there’s not a lot we can do is there, the law is the law.

Civil Servant Do we really have to go over this again, Minister? Yes, the law is the law. But, also, the law can be whatever you decide it to be.

Minister So what you’re saying – is we should make democracy more exclusive?

Civil Servant I’m saying imagine a world being a politician was no longer a cause – but a ‘profession’.

Minister But that’s what you are, Humphrey, the civil service is the professional wing of politics. You’re asking us to become more like you?

Civil Servant I’m just saying imagine it, Minister. Imagine what that would be like . . .

They stare out – Minister with a look of growing horror; Civil Servant with a look of awe and contentment . . .

‘ALLO ‘ALLO

Sutch (RENEE) arrives with his nomination papers. An Assistant Returning Officer (CONSTABLE) is there waiting. Sutch does the trademark piece to camera opening.

Sutch Oh, hello. I am back here, once again, with my papers, hoping that I am not found out to be the fraud that I am. I have mother waiting in her bedroom – she has become so weak of late. Sometimes I think my ritual humiliation in front of millions of people is the only thing that keeps her going. (He approaches the desk.)

Assistant Officer Good moaning.

Sutch There you go. My papers, all in order I think you will find.

Assistant Officer Papers? For what?

Sutch For this constituency.

Assistant Officer There is no inconsistency.

Sutch No, this constituency. Finchley.

Assistant Officer But sir, this is just an humble toon hall, going about its normal everyday business. You have made a bug mistook. Excuse me.

He stands and leaves. Sutch hovers uncertainly, a Deputy Returning Officer (MICHELLE) appears out from underneath the table.

Deputy Officer Psst! You must listen very carefully. I shall say this only once.

She flicks a switch and the table flips to become a registration desk.

I am the Deputy Returning Officer, and I will register you, quickly.

Sutch But, the other officer said –

Deputy They do no want you to join. It is a trap, and we must resist!

The Chief Returning Officer (HERR FLICK) arrives.

Chief Officer Excuse me, I am ze Chief Returning Officer, vat is going on?

Sutch Oh, nothing at all, Herr Chief, haha. I was just, er, trying to sign up for the local dance that you occupiers have kindly enforced upon on us this Friday night.

Chief Officer You dance ze Spitzen-Schuhplatter?

Sutch Do I dance the –

Deputy Officer (whispering from her hiding place). Spitzen Schuhplatter?

Sutch – Spitzen schuhplatter? (to Deputy) – thank you (to Chief) – why, I teach classes in it!

Chief Officer Then what are we waiting for! They embark on the elaborate leg kicky thigh slappy dance together.

Chief Officer I see you are going for the Saschen-Anhalt variation, an interesting choice. (Stopping.) Now, may I be serious for a moment?

Sutch A serious German, surely not.

Chief Officer Vat is ze real reason behind your visit here?

Sutch (sighs). Very well, I confess. I am here to register to stand.

Chief Officer Well that’s fine.

Sutch It is?

Chief Officer But of course. We are not monsters.

He shoos the Deputy away and takes his seat.

That vill be £500, please.

Sutch Excuse me?

Chief Officer Ze deposit.

Sutch It’s gone up?

Chief Officer Yes. It has.

Sutch You . . . you cannot just do that.

Chief Officer Ze leader can do whatever she sees fit. Ve want more – decorum, brought to the proceedings.

Sutch I can bring decorum.

Chief Officer Your papers say you’re planning to stand behind her at the count, vith a tin opener, trying to ‘open ze Iron Lady’s head’.

Sutch (laughs) Yeah, yeah, I am planning to do that, yeah.

Chief Officer £500, please.

The Chief Officer begins to laugh a wicked laugh, beginning small, growing bigger.

Sutch You won’t get away with this. I’ll be back! You just watch!

He storms off, and grabs hold of who we’ll later discover to be BALDRICK, kicking him around.

BLACKADDER

Another ‘Monster Raving Loony Party’ conference at the Golden Lion.

Stuart (BALDRICK), Alan (MELCHETT), Pauline (QUEENIE) and the Barmaid (PERCY) already present around the table, as Sutch (BLACKADDER) arrives.

Sutch Can you believe it?! They have more cheek than Cheeky the Chipmunk, who has stuffed his cheeks so full of nuts, he can barely fit through the door of the annual Cheeky Chipmunk Contest, and is feeling particularly cheeky about it.

Alan Beerrr come man, don’t sulk like a ninny! What’s the matter with you?

Sutch Oh nothing, just another day, another opportunity for those who Lord themselves up us peasants to open their arses and empty their bowels all over my plans to get out of here.

Pauline Oh really, that’s horrid, what a thing to say.

Stuart Don’t you worry sir, I have a cunning plan to raise you £500. We raid the membership coffers.

Barmaid Ooh, well sir, I wouldn’t do that, if I were you, that money is to be saved for a rainy day.

Sutch This is England. Every day is a rainy day.

Alan Well I don’t think you’re going to like the news I am about to deliver, given your current mood.

Sutch Let me guess. You’ve an incurable disease known as Thickess Shitus, and it’s finally spread to what remains of your brain.

Alan No.

Sutch Oh, shame.

Alan Well is a trifle awkward, actually –

Pauline Oh I’ll just tell him. David, Alan here . . .

Sutch What . . .?

Pauline The local council elections.

Sutch Yes?

Pauline . . . Alan won.

A gasp, everyone standing.

Sutch You did what?

Alan I won, a seat on the Devon Council.

Sutch I . . . I . . .

Stuart Hooray!

Sutch (pokes him in the eye) No, it is not hooray, not hooray at all.

Alan I did try to lose, really I did. But – well, the people of Devon must be madder than we thought. Berrrr!

Sutch Now you wait, just a minute –

JUST A MINUTE

The radio panel show – Sutch (PAUL MERTON), Nicholas Parsons, Sandi Toksvig and Julian Clary.

Parsons It’s time for – Just a minute! Yey!

The theme music.

On today’s panel, Sandi Toksvig, Julian Clary and Screaming Lord Sutch. Contestants must speak for one minute with no hesitation, deviation or repetition. Screaming Lord Sutch, it’s your turn to go first, and the subject you’ll be speaking on first is – the great British election!

Sutch (as MERTON) I love General Elections because it’s the only day of the year where I can go into a primary school with the sole aim of bringing down the British government, and not be arrested on site. I myself as a citizen of this country have stood against the standing Prime Minister on over 10 occasions now –

Clary (buzzes) Repetition.

Parsons Yes, I’m afraid it has been quite repetitive hasn’t it. Very well, Julian, your minute starts now.

Clary Well I like a good scream, as many of you will know, but this obsession with trying to get strangers to fill your box instead of other people’s boxes . . . it seems a little sadistic to be honest.

Toksvig (buzzes) Deviation.

Parsons Well, being a deviant is not necessarily the same thing as deviation, but we’ll give you the benefit of the doubt. Restart the clock. Sandi.

Toksvig You know, I was, thinking, the other day, about our friend the Lord Sutch here. Is he up there, I ask, with the greats. Tony Hancock, Kenneth Williams, John Major? What a lot of them shared is how utterly miserable they were on the inside. And I wonder –

Sutch (buzzes). Deviation, deviation. I myself have a very healthy personal and emotional life, as it happens. I’ve had many girlfriends, and in fact, I had a woman in my life who was lucky enough to give me a son recently. True, they both left this sceptre’d isle for America, because in the end, I didn’t marry her –

Clary (buzzes) He hesitated, that’s why she left.

Parsons Yes it does sound like a hesitation, so over to Julian.

Clary Our elections have become cheap and nasty farces, a freak show where these lunatics stand even though they have no chance of winning.

Sutch (buzzes) That’s not true, we have several council seats now. And in the Bootle by-election, we came THIRD! Third, ahead of the SDP, that’s one of the reasons why their party collapsed, because of us! Us! No, wait, wait, wait –

Clary and Sandi are buzzing. As the noise grows and grows and grows.

ONLY FOOLS AND HORSES

The town hall again – a Returning Officer (BOYCIE) and his Assistant (MARLENE) at the issuing desk as Sutch (DEL BOY) arrives with Stuart (RODNEY).

Sutch Alright, play it cool, Stuart, play it cool, know what I mean. (Presenting his papers.) Here you are, avec une la nomination papers, por le vou!

Returning Officer Marlene, kindly check these papers, my sweet. I trust you have come here with your financial affairs in order.

Sutch Of course, tout suite. Take cash, do you?

Returning Officer Cash? Bit vulgar isn’t it?

Sutch Vulgar, it’s got the Queen’s head on it, don’t get that with a cheque, do you Stuart?

Stuart No, that’s right, you don’t.

Sutch Here.

Assistant I’m afraid I’ve found a problem.

Returning Officer Oh no, a problem you say. Quelle Surprise, Marlene.

Assistant Your second nominee. They should have signed there, and there. But instead they’ve signed there, and there.

Returning Officer Oh yeah, you see, the form, you see. We’ve changed it. (Smiles.)

Sutch Changed it?

Returning Officer Yeah. Just subtly. But we changed it.

He gives his Boycie laugh.

Sutch But you can’t do that. It’s too complicated, obviously. (At Stuart.) Even he couldn’t do it, and he’s got 3 GCEs.

Stuart You can’t do this. He always stands, that’s what he does.

Sutch Quick, give me some more papers.

Returning Officer (at his watch) Whoops, sorry, the deadline to issue new papers has passed.

Another laugh. Sutch seethes, turns on his heels, and exits, grabbing a bottle and taking a swig, shoving some pills down his throat as well, as –

ABSOLUTELY FABULOUS

Another ‘Monster Raving Loony’ conference at the Golden Lion.

Sutch (EDWINA), still swigging from her bottle, is with Pauline (PATSY) facing Stuart (SAPPHIE) stood shamefacedly nearby.

Sutch Darling. Stuart, darling, what do mean, tell mummy it isn’t true.

Stuart It is true, I’m sorry –

Pauline Treacherous bitch!

Sutch No, don’t speak to my darling Stewie, like that, you don’t mean it, do you? You’re just teasing mummy, aren’t you? You aren’t really leaving . . .

Stuart I am, I’m sorry. I’ve been offered an actual seat, by . . . by the Conservatives.

Pauline starts to wretch violently.

Sutch It’s alright Pauline, it’s alright, deep breaths, suck it in – look what you’ve done!

Stuart I’m going to become a real MP, with real powers! Isn’t that a good thing?!

Pauline The Tories! Of course you would choose the ugly, stiff, frigid ones, you’ll fit right in!

Sutch You may as well have ripped my heart out and swallowed it, and then shat it out and fed it back to me, darling that would have left a better taste in my mouth than this! Why Stewie, darling, why?!

Stuart I grew up! David.

I’m – sorry. But. We’re not teenagers, anymore. This is the world as it is. And it’s time to take that seriously. I want to be a part of it, and contribute, something, serious.

I’ll always be a loony at heart. I – I will. I . . . I love you. (He goes.)

Sutch No, Stuart, no, wait, we want you to stay, (to Pauline), don’t we, tell Stewie. Tell him we want him to stay with us. Stuart!

The Band Member spins some more records, different tracks and songs throughout the period, growing louder and more distorted, as on the television we flicker through the sleaze of the Major years, the arrival of New Labour and Tony Blair . . .

ALAN PARTRIDGE

Sutch (PARTRIDGE) at the decks, speaking into the mic.

Sutch A-ha! You’re listening to Harrow Hospital Radio, where your guest DJ today is none other than – David Sutch! Playing you all the golden oldies you remember, unless you’re in the dementia ward in which case good afternoon, it’s 1968 and this is the Top 40 countdown! But seriously, I’d like to dedicate this next one to a very special lady listening to this – she’s been the Number 1 woman in my life, I can hear your awwwhing, except from the respiratory ward, where I can detect a rather touching wheeze. I’m talking about my dear old mum. And normally, of course, for any fans out there – you would know that this is a very special day for other reasons. It is of course, the election, May 1st, 1997. And I would normally be there, out on the stumps, I haven’t missed a single one in decades, you know, except when it wasn’t my fault, it was the system’s fault. Still, I am missing it for you, mum, who I know is listening in her ward –

(Pauline enters.)

– and tonight, you can still catch me, and my band The Savages, at the South Harrow Social Club. Not now, Pauline, I’m sorry. Everyone, my assistant and dear friend has just arrived, with a rather sombre-looking expression on her face. She’s shaking her head back and forth gravely, as if to hint at me, some bad news. Pauline, just give me a quick nod, is it about my mum?

It is about my mum, she’s nodding dear listeners. Pauline, is my mum listening to this?

She’s shaking head now, listeners – gosh, it’s like one of those awful dramas you get on Radio 4 where clocks tick in studies and people are forever walking on gravel. Why don’t they lay down some paving slabs in afternoon plays, that’s what I want to know.

Well – Mother – you’re clearly listening to me now on the wireless in the sky, so despite my own personal tastes, which are impeccable, here’s one of your favourite tunes, just for you . . .

He plays Shirley Bassey’s ‘THIS IS MY LIFE’, and stands, moving away from the decks. Behind him, on the television, Tony Blair sweeps to victory.

He turns the television off with a remote and removes his headphones, stepping forward.

Pauline Are you alright?

Sutch No, I’m kind of wrapped up in soul-crushing grief at the moment, Pauline.

Pauline You could – go out. There’s still time. You could go to the count. Say something. About her. A lovely little speech . . .

Sutch Speeches are for the winners, and I don’t win. That’s the whole – why is that so hard for you to get your oddly shaped head around? Chaplin didn’t have a voice his entire career, until the very end, when the world got so utterly mental he had to say something.

Pauline David –

Sutch You think it’s been a waste of time, don’t you? Admit it. It’s all utterly pointless.

Pauline No, of course not.

Sutch Well then tell me, clever clogs, what is the point, because, hahaha, I’m not sure I know anymore, if I’m honest.

Pauline David, it’s OK to be sad –

Sutch A lifetime just standing there, on stage, wearing a silly costume.

Pauline You can drop the act.

Sutch What act? There isn’t an act. It’s all an act. I am the act. Where’s the act? I haven’t got an act. We’re all an act!

He starts doing a mock, old-school tap-dancing act, increasingly manic, lifting his top hat up and down, spinning, turning . . .

We’re all just tap-dancing on the pier, as it sinks slowly into the cold, English sea. All you can do is laugh the way down. Hahahahahahaha!

Pauline grabs and holds him awkwardly, and he stops. A beat. She turns to go . . . but stops briefly, facing away from him.

Pauline The point, David. When you’re up on stage at those counts with the rest of those grey-faced, straight-laced, miserable, lying bastards. Is that you’re the only one up there who isn’t wearing a costume . . .

Beat. She goes . . .

Alone again, briefly . . . Sutch half-attempts ‘The Tramp’ again. The silent clown . . . The TV screen flickers on. ‘THE GREAT DICTATOR’, staring Chaplin.

The lines we heard from before . . .

‘You must speak’. ‘I can’t’. ‘You must. It’s our only hope’. ‘Hope’ . . .

Sutch watches. Chaplin approaching the mic. Searching for something to say . . .

‘I’m sorry. But I don’t want to be an emperor. That’s not my business. I should like to help everyone, if possible . . . We all/ want to help each other . . .

Sutch (overlapping with him) We all want to help one another. Human beings are like that. We want to live by each other’s happiness, not by each other’s misery.

To those who can hear me, I say – do not despair. The misery that is now upon us is but the passing of greed – the bitterness of men who fear the way of human progress. The hate of men will pass, and dictators die, and the power they took from the people will return to the people. And so long as men die, liberty will never perish . . .!

The sound of cheers from the film – Sutch, fists clenched, face pained, as he begins to disappear . . .

. . . the lights of the social club return. Stark, everyday. The Band are packing away. Sutch sits on a stool. Band Member Good show, I thought. Tonight. Dave?

Sutch (as himself, whatever that is, for the very first time) I don’t know what I’ll do.

Band Member Who are you doing now, I can’t tell.

Sutch I’m not doing anyone.

Band Member What?

Sutch I said I’m not ‘doing’ anyone, this is just – this is me.

Band Member Oh. Well. Sorry, David. I know you were close, and all.

Sutch ‘Sic transit gloria.’ I looked it up. ‘Sic transit gloria.’ It’s Latin.

Band Member Sorry. They didn’t do that at my school. We didn’t even have a motto.

Sutch Me neither. The Emperors, in Rome. They used to employ this little chap to walk behind ’em, during parades and things. His job was to stand behind the Emperor, and keep whispering that into his ear – ‘sic transit gloria’. ‘Glory fades.’ It was to keep them grounded. Remind them of how fragile it all was . . .

I always thought people would think . . . ‘If he’s bloody standing . . .’

Band Member . . . Are you going to be alright? At home. Sorting everything. You got people to help you, with all the –

Sutch I’ll be fine.

The Band Member goes.

Sutch You stupid boy . . . Suits you sir –

Just like that –

Here’s a very naughty boy! – I have a cunning plan –

Ooh you are awful, but I like you – I don’t believe it! –

That’s goodnight from me and it’s goodnight from him –

Tonight Matthew I’m going to . . . tonight Matthew I’m going to be . . . tonight Matthew I’m going to be . . .!

He can’t answer his own question. So he exits.

THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS

Millicent Martin (singing) That was the week that was. A life passes before our eyes

From a master of disguise

Or just an Emperor in new clothes?

He stood 41 times And lost 41 times

But he didn’t seem to mind With his leopard-print coat Screaming at you to vote That democracy rocks

So put a cross in his box His only defence

Was that insanity – made sense. That was the week that was!

David Frost John F Kennedy. Lord Mountbatten. Martin Luther King. To their special club of great political titans taken from us too early . . . they have a gate crasher, The self-titled, self-aggrandising, self-appointed, Screaming Lord Sutch, the 3rd Earl of Harrow, has died.

He was found hanging from the bannister of his late mother’s house after committing suicide. His home, an Aladdin’s Cave of hoarded items and memorabilia that neighbours say took three skips, to clear out. Testament to a life that began at the very start of the War, and concluded at the very end of this century.

500 hundred people turned up to listen to the funeral service, wearing loony outfits. Including the Conservative Stuart Hughes, also dressed in Loony attire.

Screaming Lord Sutch broke the record as being, officially, the least successful politician of all time. And yet also, at the time of his death, he became the longest-serving leader of a British political party in history. His legacy lives on.

Modern Prime Ministers arrive on stage – Major, Blair, Brown and Cameron. Behind them, appears Sutch, in his outfit . . .

The sound of a Panto Dame, echoing around us.

‘Where is he, can you see him, boys and girls? Can you see where he is?’ Followed by the cry from the audience: ‘He’s behind you’.

Blackout.





Discover. Read. Listen. Watch.

A NEW WAY TO ENGAGE WITH PLAYS

Over 2,000 titles, in text, audio and video,

from curriculum must-haves to contemporary classics

Playtexts from over 300 leading playwrights including

David Mamet, Katori Hall, Samuel Beckett, Caryl Churchill,

Jez Butterworth, debbie tucker green, Bertolt Brecht,

Christopher Shinn, Tom Stoppard, Bernard Shaw, Anton Chekhov,

Sophocles, the Arden Shakespeare and more

400 Audio plays From L.A. Theatre Works including

works by Pulitzer Prize-winning playwrights Lynn Nottage,

Arthur Miller, Tracy Letts, David Henry Hwang,

Sam Shepard, Paula Vogel and more

Live performances, feature films,

documentaries and more

PLUS scholarly books, student guides,

reference and theatre craft

FIND OUT MORE:

www.dramaonlinelibrary.com • @dramaonlinelib





Bloomsbury Methuen Drama Modern Plays

include work by

Bola Agbaje Robert Holman

Edward Albee Caroline Horton

Davey Anderson Terry Johnson

Jean Anouilh Sarah Kane

John Arden Barrie Keeffe

Peter Barnes Doug Lucie

Sebastian Barry Anders Lustgarten

Alistair Beaton David Mamet

Brendan Behan Patrick Marber

Edward Bond Martin McDonagh

William Boyd Arthur Miller

Bertolt Brecht D. C. Moore

Howard Brenton Tom Murphy

Amelia Bullmore Phyllis Nagy

Anthony Burgess Anthony Neilson

Leo Butler Peter Nichols

Jim Cartwright Joe Orton

Lolita Chakrabarti Joe Penhall

Caryl Churchill Luigi Pirandello

Lucinda Coxon Stephen Poliakoff

Curious Directive Lucy Prebble

Nick Darke Peter Quilter

Shelagh Delaney Mark Ravenhill

Ishy Din Philip Ridley

Claire Dowie Willy Russell

David Edgar Jean-Paul Sartre

David Eldridge Sam Shepard

Dario Fo Martin Sherman

Michael Frayn Wole Soyinka

John Godber Simon Stephens

Paul Godfrey Peter Straughan

James Graham Kate Tempest

David Greig Theatre Workshop

John Guare Judy Upton

Mark Haddon Timberlake Wertenbaker

Peter Handke Roy Williams

David Harrower Snoo Wilson

Jonathan Harvey Frances Ya-Chu Cowhig

Iain Heggie Benjamin Zephaniah





For a complete listing of Bloomsbury

Methuen Drama titles, visit:

www.bloomsbury.com/drama

Follow us on Twitter and keep up to date

with our news and publications

@MethuenDrama





Bloomsbury Methuen Drama

An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc

Imprint previously known as Methuen Drama

50 Bedford Square

1385 Broadway



London

New York



WC1B 3DP

NY 10018



UK

USA





www.bloomsbury.com

Bloomsbury is a registered trade mark of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc

This collection first published 2016

This House first published in 2012 by Methuen Drama and revised in 2013 © James Graham 2012, 2013, 2016

The Angry Brigade first published in 2014 by Methuen Drama and revised in 2016 © James Graham 2014, 2016

The Vote first published in 2016 by Methuen Drama © James Graham 2016

Monster Raving Loony first published in 2016 by Methuen Drama © James Graham 2016

This collection copyright © James Graham 2016

Introduction copyright © James Graham 2016

James Graham has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as author of this work.

All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.

No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author.

This version of the text went to print before the end of rehearsals and may differ slightly from the version performed.

All rights whatsoever in these plays are strictly reserved and application for performance etc. should be made before rehearsals begin to Curtis Brown Group Ltd., Haymarket House, 28- 29 Haymarket, London, SW1Y 4SP.

No rights in incidental music or songs contained in the Work are hereby granted and performance rights for any performance/ presentation whatsoever must be obtained from the respective copyright owners.

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN: PB: 978-1-3500-2157-0

ePub: 978-1-3500-2159-4

ePDF: 978-1-3500-2158-7

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.

Cover image © Getty Images/Tim Thompson/EyeEm

Typeset by Mark Heslington Ltd, Scarborough, North Yorkshire





